Unsolvability of the Halting Problem in Quantum Dynamics
Daegene Song
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899
(Dated: October 2, 2018)
It is shown that the halting problem cannot be solved consistently in both the Schrödinger and
Heisenberg pictures of quantum dynamics. The existence of the halting machine, which is assumed
from quantum theory, leads into a contradiction when we consider the case when the observer’s
reference frame is the system that is to be evolved in both pictures. We then show that in order
to include the evolution of observer’s reference frame in a physically sensible way, the Heisenberg
picture with time going backwards yields a correct description.

arXiv:quant-ph/0610047v1 7 Oct 2006

PACS numbers:

With the construction of universal quantum Turing
machine, Deutsch proposed [1] a quantum version of the
halting problem first proved by Alan Turing in 1936 [2].
In recent years, a lot of interest has been focused on
quantum computation [3], and the discussion of the halting problem using a quantum computer has also received
attention. Myers argued [4] that due to entanglement
between a halt qubit and a system, it may be difficult
to measure the halt qubit, which may spoil the computation. Subsequent discussions on the halting problem with
a quantum computer have mainly focused on the superposition and entanglement of the halt qubit [5, 6, 7].
In this paper, we approach the halting scheme differently and use two pictures of quantum dynamics, i.e.,
the Schrödinger and Heisenberg pictures. Schrödinger’s
wave mechanics and Heisenberg’s matrix mechanics were
formulated in the early twentieth century and have been
considered to be equivalent, i.e., two different ways of describing the same physical phenomenon that we observe.
Therefore, in order to consider a halting scheme for a
quantum system, we need to examine whether the procedure is consistent in both the Schrödinger and Heisenberg
pictures. We will give an example in quantum dynamics
that shows this cannot be achieved. We will then argue
that it is the Heisenberg picture, rather than both pictures, that yields the correct description that not only
does not run into the inconsistency shown through the
halting scheme but also is physically sensible.
In order to discuss the halting problem, we first wish to
define notations to be used. In particular we will follow
a similar notation used in [8, 9] such that it is convenient
in both Schrödinger and Heisenberg pictures. A qubit, a
basic unit of quantum information, is a two-level quantum system written as |ψi = a|0i + b|1i. Using a Bloch
sphere notation, i.e., with a = exp(−iφ/2) cos(θ/2) and
b = exp(iφ/2) sin(θ/2), a qubit in a density matrix form
can be written as |ψihψ| = 12 (1 + v̂ ·~σ ) where (vx , vy , vz )
= (sin θ cos φ, sin θ sin φ, cos θ) and ~σ = (σx , σy , σz ) with
σx = |0ih1| + |1ih0|, σy = −i|0ih1| + i|1ih0|, and σz =
|0ih0| − |1ih1|. Therefore a qubit, |ψihψ|, can be represented as a unit vector v̂ = (vx , vy , vz ) pointing in (θ, φ)
of a sphere with 0 ≤ θ ≤ π, 0 ≤ φ ≤ 2π. A unitary transformation of a qubit in the unit vector notation v̂ can be
obtained by applying U to σi for the corresponding ith

component of the vector v̂, i.e., vi , where i = x, y, z (also
see [10] for a general transformation of a single qubit in
a Bloch sphere). We will write the transformation of v̂
under the unitary operation U as v̂′ = U v̂U † , implying
the unitary transformation is applied to the corresponding σi . For example, let us consider the case when U
is a rotation about y-axis by α in a Bloch sphere, i.e.,
U = cos α2 |0ih0| − sin α2 |0ih1| + sin α2 |1ih0| + cos α2 |1ih1|.
Then it yields that v̂ = (vx , vy , vz ) is transformed into v̂′
≡ U v̂U † = (cos αvx + sin αvz , vy , − sin αvx + cos αvz ).
In quantum theory, there is another important variable
called an observable. For a single qubit, an observable
can also be written as a unit vector [9], ê = (ex , ey , ez )
where (ex , ey , ez ) = (sin ϑ cos ϕ, sin ϑ sin ϕ, cos ϑ), pointing (ϑ, ϕ) direction in a sphere. Therefore if one is to
make a measurement in (ϑ, ϕ) direction, the observable
would be ê · ~σ . In the Heisenberg picture of quantum
theory, it is the unit basis vector ê that is transformed
(p243, [11]). Using a similar transformation rule as in v̂,
a unitary transformation of the observable in the basis
vector notation can be obtained by applying U † to the
σj by U † σj U for ej which we represent as ê′ = U † êU .
As an example, we again consider the case when U is
a rotation about y-axis by α as follows ê′ ≡ U † êU =
(cos αex − sin αez , ey , sin αex + cos αez ). As shown in
Fig. 1, the directions of transformation for two vectors are different for Schrödinger and Heisenberg pictures. Therefore the expectation value ê′ ·v̂ in the Heisenberg picture remains the same as in the case with the
Schrödinger picture, i.e., e · v̂′ . For the remainder of this
paper, we will treat the two vectors v̂ and ê on an equal
footing. The only specialty about ê is that it serves as a
coordinate or a basis vector such that when a measurement is made on the vector v̂, the expectation value is
with respect to ê.
With a quantum system and a halt qubit, Deutsch
introduced [1] a quantum version of the halting problem
wherein the completion of every valid quantum algorithm
through a unitary process applied to the quantum system is accompanied by the change in a halt qubit to 1
that remains 0 otherwise. We will assume such a halting
machine exists and will argue that this assumption leads
into a contradiction. With the introduced notations, we
will consider one particular case of the halting machine,

2
e

e

v

e
v

v

(a) Schrodinger picture

(b) Heisenberg picture

FIG. 1: For the Schrödinger picture (a), the unit vector v̂
evolves while the unit basis vector ê is intact. In the Heisenberg picture (b), the basis vector ê is rotated into opposite
direction by the same amount while the unit vector v̂ remains,
thereby keeping the angle between the two vectors, therefore
the expectation values, the same in both pictures.

that is, when the halting machine consists of a unit vector v̂s ≡ (vx , vy , vz ) and a halt qubit v̂h ≡ (0, 0, 1).
We do not include an ancilla state because it will not
be needed for our discussion. The time evolution of the
halting machine is defined through a unitary process, and
the machine halts when the unit vector v̂s is rotated by δ
about an arbitrary n̂ = (nx , ny , nz )-axis. This time evolution of the halting machine can be achieved with the
unit vector v̂s evolving as follows
v̂s → Uδ v̂s Uδ†

(1)

where Uδ ≡ cos(δ/2)1−i sin(δ/2)(n̂·~σ ) and the halt qubit
v̂h is transformed into −v̂h with a unitary operation σx .
In the following, we will show this halting machine runs
into a contradiction.
Before we proceed with our discussion of the halting
problem, we wish to discuss the concept of observables in
quantum theory. When we want to check a moving vehicle’s speed, we may use a speed gun and could read, for
example, 80km/hr. Or we could use a thermometer to
measure a room temperature which may yield, for example, 25 degrees Celsius. While the measurement tools,
such as the speed gun and the thermometer, yield the
output with not only numbers but also units such as
km/hr and degrees Celsius, what the actual measurement
yields is rather different. For example, a laser speed gun
checks the distances from the gun at two different times
and is designed to calculate and to yield an output of
the moving vehicle’s speed. A mercury-thermometer is
designed to show the temperature in relation to the increase of the volume of mercury in the thermometer. The
numbers obtained from the measurement represent the
perception experienced by an observer and the meaning
of those numbers, such as speed or temperature represented with units, a concept, is imposed by an observer.
In quantum theory, concepts such as position and momentum are called observables and the numbers that result from the measurements are represented as eigenvalues (p63, [11]).

Let us take an example of a one-dimensional line as
shown in Fig. 2. In order to claim a dot, which is lying
on the line, is either on the right or on the left, there
should be a reference point. For example, with respect
to the origin or with respect to +3, one may say the
dot is on the left or on the right. Instead of looking at
the line from outside, suppose there is an observer being
confined to the one-dimensional line facing into the paper as shown in (C) of Fig. 2. The observer measures or
perceives whether the dot is on the right or on the left.
Depending on where the observer is sitting, the outcome
of the measurement, i.e., either on the right or on the
left, will change. In this case, we note that the observer
him or herself is serving the role of the reference point.
Therefore when the observer makes a measurement and
gets a result that the dot is on the right or on the left, this
implies that with respect to his or her reference frame of
the position on the line, the dot is on the right or on the
left. Let us apply the same logic to the case of a single qubit in a Bloch sphere. When an observer measures
a qubit in a certain direction, say in n̂, the outcome of
the measurement is either +1 or −1. The eigenvalue obtained is with respect to the measurement direction n̂. It
is noted that n̂ is playing a similar role as the reference
point in the case of the one-dimensional line example.
We also note that the measurement outcome of +1 or
−1 is the perception experienced by the observer. That
is, it is the observer who obtains the outcome +1 or −1.
Therefore, the outcome should be meaningful with respect to the observer’s certain reference frame. Because
we already know that the eigenvalue outcome +1 or −1
is meaningful with respect to the measurement direction
n̂, it leads us to consider the observer’s reference frame
as n̂ for our single qubit measurement case. Using the
unit vector notations we previously defined, we propose
the following:
Postulate I: Given a unit vector v̂, an observer’s reference frame is identified with a basis unit vector ê.
With this postulate, two pictures of quantum theory can
have a natural physical realization between an observer
and a system. Fig. 1 shows that, in the Schrödinger picture, the observer’s reference frame, represented by the
unit basis vector ê, stays still while the state vector is rotated clockwise by α, and the Heisenberg picture shows
the unit vector stays still and the observer’s coordinate
is rotated counterclockwise by α. In both cases, the observer would observe exactly the same phenomenon.
It should be noted that we are not using a notion of
detector or apparatus in the place of an observer. According to our postulate, for a given unit vector, the observer’s reference frame is represented with a unit basis
vector in a Bloch sphere. However, it was shown that
[12] a finite dimensional detector cannot encode an arbitrary unitary transformation whereas, according to our
postulate, the observer’s identified coordinate unit basis
vector represents an arbitrary measurement basis for a
given qubit. Therefore, we do not use the term detector
or an apparatus to replace an observer. If one wants to

3

-3

-2

-1

0

+1

-2

-1

0

-2

-1

0

e

y

+1

(a) Schrodinger picture

+1

e
x

y

x

+2 +3

(B)

-3

z

e

+2 +3

(A)

-3

z

e

+2 +3

(C)

FIG. 2: For (A), it is not possible to claim the black dot is on
the right or on the left. In (B), we may say, with respect to
the flag in +3, the dot is on the left. If we assume there is an
observer living and sitting at +3 while facing into the paper
(i.e., the same direction as the reader of this paper) as in (C)
and if the observer measures and obtains the result that the
dot is on the left, then it is the observer who is serving the
role of the flag in (B), i.e., as a reference point.

include an apparatus or detector, we may consider the
state, i.e., v̂, to be a larger system that includes a qubit
and an apparatus and the coordinate vector for an observer would also be represented by the same larger basis
vector. However, in this paper, we only consider the simplest possible case of a single qubit.
Let us now consider a system with an observer and
the halting machine defined with the evolution in (1).
That is, we are considering a closed system consisted of
a quantum state, represented by the unit vector v̂s =
(vx , vy , vz ), an observer, whom we call Alice, represented
by the reference frame ês = (ex , ey , ez ) introduced above,
and a halt qubit v̂h along with Alice’s reference frame for
the halt qubit defined as êh ≡ (0, 0, 1). Alice is to transform the unit vector v̂s by δ about an arbitrary n̂ =
(nx , ny , nz )-axis with Uδ = cos(δ/2)1 − i sin(δ/2)(n̂ · ~σ )
and also applies σx on a halt qubit such that v̂h → −v̂h .
If Alice were to measure the evolved vector state, the expectation value would be ês · (Uδ v̂s Uδ† ). Next, we wish
to consider the same procedure in the Heisenberg picture. In the Schrödinger picture we discussed above, the
unitary evolution was performed on v̂s . Therefore, in the
Heisenberg picture, the Uδ† transforms the basis vector ês
into Uδ† ês Uδ where Uδ† = cos(δ/2)1 + i sin(δ/2)(n̂ · ~σ ) and
the observable for the halt qubit, i.e., êh , is transformed
into −êh . It yields the expectation value of (Uδ† ês Uδ ) · v̂s
which is equal to the expectation value in the Schrödinger
picture, ês · (Uδ v̂s Uδ† ).

(b) Heisenberg picture

FIG. 3: Unitary evolution of ê is considered. The vector ê is
initially pointing z-direction and is rotated about y-axis by χ
after time t. In the Schrödinger picture as in (a), the vector
is rotated clockwise and in (b) the vector is rotated by −χ.

We now consider the halting machine in (1) with one
particular input. That is, when the input state to be
transformed is the Alice’s unit basis vector, i.e., v̂s = ês .
Note that we are treating v̂ and ê on a equal footing. In the Schrödinger picture, the evolution is, ês →
Uδ ês Uδ† ≡ ê′′s , and Alice also transforms v̂h → −v̂h .
We now consider the same procedure in the Heisenberg picture. In this case, the unit basis vector ês , is
transformed as ês → Uδ† ês Uδ ≡ ê′′′
s and êh → −êh .
Note that ê′′s 6= ê′′′
unless
ê
=
±n̂
or δ = kπ where
s
s
k = 0, 1, 2.... For the example of a system with an observer and the halting machine studied in the previous
paragraph, the vector v̂s has evolved, with respect to ês ,
into the same output in both Schrödinger and Heisenberg
pictures. Similarly, with respect to êh , the halt qubit,
v̂h , halted in both pictures. However, in the case with ês
as an input we just considered, while the halt qubit v̂h
halted on both occasions with respect to êh , the vector
that is being evolved, i.e., ês , turned out as two generally different outputs in two pictures. This contradicts
our assumption about the halting machine in (1) because
the machine should yield an output that is a rotation of
the input by δ about a n̂-axis and is unique.
Therefore, we have shown that the existence of the
halting machine that is assumed from quantum theory
leads into a contradiction when we consider the input of
the unit basis vector ês (for simplicity, we will omit the
subscript s from now on), which is transformed into two
generally different outputs in Schrödinger and Heisenberg
pictures. However, not only can the halting problem not
be solved consistently in both pictures, but also the evolution of the unit basis vector ê is physically sensible in
neither of the two pictures in quantum dynamics. With
our first postulate, we were able to impose a physical
meaning on the Schrödinger and Heisenberg pictures of
quantum theory. That is, in case of the Schrödinger picture, the system is evolving while an observer’s reference
frame is intact and, for the Heisenberg’s picture, an ob-

4
server’s coordinate is evolving and the system is staying
still. The equivalence of these two pictures comes from
the fact that the observer would observe the same phenomenon and would not be able to tell the difference between them. For example, an observer applying a unitary
operation to a qubit is experiencing a unitary evolution
being applied to the qubit and this experience is the same
in both pictures. But when it is the observer’s reference
frame that is evolving, it is difficult to imagine how an
observer could observe or experience it. As shown in (a)
of Fig. 3, let us assume that initially vector ê is pointing
z-direction and with the unitary operation of rotation
about y-axis, ê evolves under

must be time forwarding.
Note that we are only postulating that the observer’s experience is time forwarding and not necessarily the whole
system, i.e., including the physical system and the observer, is time forwarding.
Let us re-consider the evolution of ê under the Heisenberg picture. Note that for the unitary operation in (3),
it is possible to change the signs of t and σy while keeping
the whole unitary operator the same, that is
U † = e−iσy (−t)/2

(4)

As shown in Fig. 3, the vector is being rotated counterclockwise and is in −χ(t). In this case, for the observer
in the reference frame of −χ(t), there needs to be additional vector in χ′ (t) in order for Alice to experience the
evolution of ê. Again, this is not possible because −χ(t)
is not only Alice’s reference frame but also the system
vector. Therefore, in order to have a satisfactory picture
of Alice observing her own reference frame’s evolution,
Alice needs another reference frame or another vector.
Therefore, it is not possible for either picture to be the
correct way to describe the observer’s experience of the
evolution of ê. Because ê is serving the role of both what
the observer experiences and the observer’s own reference
frame, we need a picture such that the evolution of ê is
neither of them yet yields the observer’s experience of
ê’s evolution. In order to resolve the dilemma discussed
above and to determine the correct description for the
observer’s experience, we introduce our second postulate
as follows:
Postulate II: What an observer observes or experiences

This corresponds to the vector evolving to χ while t is
going to the minus direction compared to the previous
Heisenberg case wherein the vector evolved to −χ with
time going forward. In this case, we note that the observer cannot be in the reference frame χ(−t) because
from the second postulate, we assumed what the observer
observes or experiences is only time forwarding. If Alice
is in the reference frame that is moving backward in time,
she would observe everything going backward in time.
However, from the assumption we made with the second postulate, this is not possible. We may consider the
same trick with Schrödinger picture evolution, that is,
by putting minus signs for both time and σy . But in this
case, it still requires an additional observer’s reference
frame because the observer who is in the reference frame
with time forwarding would simply observe χ in +t. This
is similar to the way an electron in the negative energy
would appear as a positron in the positive energy to an
observer who is also in the positive energy. Therefore, in
the Schrödinger picture, this new view still requires an
additional reference frame and is not satisfactory.
Therefore, with two postulates, in order to have a satisfactory description of experiencing the evolution of ê
as well as of v̂, we are forced to conclude that the quantum evolution follows according to the Heisenberg picture, not the Schrödinger picture, with time going backwards as shown in (4). Moreover, it leads us to abandon
the general picture having the observer being in a certain reference frame evolving in time and observing the
other vector. In other words, the more familiar picture of
the observer being in the reference frame that is evolving
forward in time should be abandoned, and the observer
should be identified as what is being observed, i.e., χ,
and its association with time, t.

[1] D. Deutsch, Proc. R. Soc. London A 400, 97 (1985).
[2] A.M. Turing, Proc. London Math. Soc. (2) 442, 230
(1936).
[3] M.A. Nielsen and I.L. Chuang, Quantum Computation
and Quantum Informatin, Cambridge University Press
(2000).
[4] J.M. Myers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 1823 (1997).
[5] M. Ozawa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 631 (1998).
[6] N. Linden and S. Popescu, quant-ph/9806054.

[7] Y. Shi, Phys. Lett. A 293, 277 (2002).
[8] D. Gottesman, quant-ph/9807006.
[9] D. Deutsch and P. Hayden, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 456,
1759 (2000).
[10] L. Hardy and D. Song, Phys. Rev. A 63, 032304 (2001).
[11] A. Peres, Quantum Theory, Kluwer Academic Publishers, (1991).
[12] M.A. Nielsen and I.L. Chuang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 321
(1997).

U = e−iσy t/2

(2)

in the Schrödinger picture. And the final state of ê would
be rotated by χ after time t, which we write as χ(t). The
difficulty with this evolution is that in order to experience the unitary evolution, Alice needs to be in another
reference frame, say χ′ (t). However, ê itself is Alice’s
reference frame and there cannot be another reference
frame. Similarly, in the Heisenberg picture, ê evolves
under
U † = eiσy t/2

(3)

