This page intentionally left blank

Clearly written and comprehensive in scope, this is an essential guide to syntax
in the Hungarian language. It describes the key grammatical features of the language, focussing on the phenomena that have proved to be theoretically the most
relevant and that have attracted the most attention. The analysis of Hungarian in
the generative framework since the late 1970s has helped to bring phenomena
which are non-overt in the English language into the focus of syntactic research.
As Katalin É. Kiss shows, its results have been built into the hypotheses that
currently make up Universal Grammar. The textbook explores issues currently
at the center of theoretical debates, including the syntax and semantics of focus,
the analysis of quantifier scope, and negative concord. This useful guide will be
welcomed by students and researchers working on syntax and those interested in
Finno-Ugric languages.
K A T A L I N É . K I S S

is Research Professor at the Institute for Linguistics,
Hungarian Academy of Sciences. She is author of Configurationality in Hungarian (1987), co-editor (with F. Kiefer) of The Syntactic Structure of Hungarian
(1994), and editor of Discourse Configurational Languages (1995).

CAMBRIDGE SYNTAX GUIDES

General editors:
S. R. Anderson, J. Bresnan, D. Lightfoot, I. Roberts, N. V. Smith, N. Vincent
Responding to the increasing interest in comparative syntax, the goal of the
Cambridge Syntax Guides is to make available to all linguists major findings,
both descriptive and theoretical, which have emerged from the study of particular
languages. The series is not committed to working in any particular framework,
but rather seeks to make language-specific research available to theoreticians and
practitioners of all persuasions.
Written by leading figures in the field, these guides will each include an
overview of the grammatical structures of the language concerned. For the descriptivist, the books will provide an accessible introduction to the methods and results
of the theoretical literature; for the theoretician, they will show how constructions
that have achieved theoretical notoriety fit into the structure of the language as a
whole; for everyone, they will promote cross-theoretical and cross-linguistic comparison with respect to a well-defined body of data.
The Syntax of Early English by Olga Fischer, Ans van Kemenade, Willem
Koopman and Wim van der Wurff
The Syntax of Spanish by Karen Zagona
The Syntax of Hungarian by Katalin É. Kiss

The Syntax of Hungarian
K A T A L I N É. K IS S

         
The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge, United Kingdom
  
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 2RU, UK
40 West 20th Street, New York, NY 10011-4211, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
Ruiz de Alarcón 13, 28014 Madrid, Spain
Dock House, The Waterfront, Cape Town 8001, South Africa
http://www.cambridge.org
© Katalin E. Kiss 2004
First published in printed format 2002
ISBN 0-511-03327-3 eBook (Adobe Reader)
ISBN 0-521-66047-5 hardback
ISBN 0-521-66939-1 paperback

Contents
Acknowledgments
1 Introduction
1.1
1.2

xi

1

Genealogy, areal distribution
1
A general overview of the syntactic and morphosyntactic features
2
of Hungarian

2 The topic–predicate articulation of the sentence
2.1 The topic function
8
2.2 The formal features of the topic constituent
9
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8

3

4

The marking of the topic–predicate boundary
11
The topic projection
12
Apparent and real topicless sentences. The (in)definiteness effect
Sentence adverbials and the topic–predicate articulation
20
The contrastive topic
22
Summary
25

The minimal predicate
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8

14

27

Argument order in the VP
27
The referentiality effect
29
The subject as an internal argument
The structure of the VP
33
Morphosyntactic projections
43
The verbal prefix
55
The nominal predicate
71
Summary
75

Focussing
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4

8

30

77

The focus function
The syntax of focus
Inherent foci
89
Only-phrases
93

77
83

vii

viii

List of contents
4.5
4.6

5

Quantification
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5

6

8

9

130

151

The basic syntactic layers of the noun phrase
151
Evidence for the different noun phrase projections
155
The possessive construction
157
Non-possessor arguments in the noun phrase
175
Summary
179

The postpositional phrase
8.1
8.2
8.3
8.4
8.5
8.6

181

Restricting the category of postpositions
181
The formal properties of postpositional phrases
184
The structure of the postpositional phrase
188
PPs as verb modifiers
191
Case-marked pronouns or PPs?
194
Summary
197

Non-finite and semi-finite verb phrases
9.1 Introduction
199
9.2
9.3
9.4
9.5
9.6
9.7

105

Two NegP projections
130
The locus of negative pronouns licensed by nem
136
The status of sem
140
The universal and existential readings of negative pronouns
Long distance negative polarity
147
148
The negative existential verb
Summary
149

The noun phrase
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4
7.5

105

Distributive quantifiers at the head of the predicate
The DistP projection
110
The scope principle
113
Quantifiers or adverbial modifiers?
126
Summary
129

Negation
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.5
6.6
6.7

7

Wh-questions
98
Summary
104

199

Subject and object control constructions
199
Infinitival complex predicates
205
Agreeing infinitives with a case-marked subject
Adverbial participle phrases
221
Adjectival participle phrases
227
Summary
229

210

142

List of contents

10

The subordinate clause
230
10.1 Introduction
230
10.2 That-clauses
230
10.3 Relative clauses
243
10.4 Adverbial clauses
248
10.5 Long operator movement
250
10.6 Parasitic gaps
260
10.7 Summary
262
References
265
Index
275

ix

Acknowledgments
This syntax is based primarily on the results of Hungarian generative
syntactic research from the past 25 years. It is a subjective enterprise in as much as
it adheres to the basic outlines of the Hungarian sentence structure that I proposed
in the late 1970s, consisting of a topic and a predicate, with the predicate containing
a head-initial verb phrase preceded by a focus and quantifiers – a structure which
can in fact be traced back to the work of Sámuel Brassai in the middle of the
nineteenth century. However, it also incorporates the work of a large community
of researchers in Hungary and abroad. I have directly adopted results of Huba
Bartos and Marcel den Dikken on Hungarian morphosyntax, ideas of Misi Bródy
concerning the focus projection, various proposals of Genovéva Puskás and Csaba
Olsvay on negation, and those of László Hunyadi on quantification. Observations
of Gábor Alberti appear in several chapters of the book. Anna Szabolcsi’s work has
influenced my view of Hungarian syntax in basic ways, particularly her works on
quantification, the structure of the noun phrase, and on the structure of the non-finite
verb phrase. The chapter on non-finite verb phrases has also benefited from the work
of Tibor Laczkó, Ildikó Tóth, and András Komlósy. The analysis of subordination
is based mainly on the work of István Kenesei, and also includes proposals by
Júlia Horváth. The chapter on the postpositional phrase incorporates observations
of László Marácz and Farrel Ackerman, whereas the discussion of aspect is based
on the work of Ferenc Kiefer, also adopting ideas of Christopher Piñon. While I
have attempted to present the various, often conflicting theories on different issues
of Hungarian syntax faithfully, I have selected from the large body of literature
only what I have found most significant and most convincing. The contribution of
my fellow syntacticians, among them my colleagues at the Linguistic Institute of
the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, and my Ph.D. and undergraduate students at
the Theoretical Linguistics Program of Eötvös Loránd University cannot always
be documented by references: our discussions and debates over the years have
constantly affected my views on Hungarian syntax. I also owe thanks to a very
conscientious and helpful anonymous reviewer.
There is also another Hungarian syntax currently available: The Syntactic Structure of Hungarian, edited by F. Kiefer and K. É. Kiss (Academic Press, 1994).
xi

xii

Acknowledgments

However, the two books differ in their coverage. This book gives a more comprehensive view of Hungarian syntax, discussing several areas not touched upon
in that book (among them the structure of PP, non-finite complementation, negation, etc.). There are also topics which are discussed in detail only in the earlier
book (for example, coordination, complementation versus adjunction, or aspect).
In the discussion of questions that are addressed in both books, the present volume
focusses on the results of the past few years.
The coverage of Hungarian syntax resembles that of the syntax chapter of
Ú j magyar nyelvtan (‘New Hungarian Grammar’), by K. É. Kiss, F. Kiefer, and
P. Siptár (Osiris, 1998); however, it is much more explicit and technical than its
Hungarian predecessor, which was intended for teachers of Hungarian.

1

Introduction
1.1

Genealogy, areal distribution

Hungarian is a Finno-Ugric language. The Finno-Ugric languages and the
practically extinct Samoyed languages of Siberia constitute the Uralic language
family. Within the Finno-Ugric family, Hungarian belongs to the Ugric branch,
together with Mansy, or Vogul, and Khanty, or Ostyak, spoken by a few thousand
people in western Siberia. The family also has:

r
r
r
r
r

a Finnic branch, including Finnish (5 million speakers) and Estonian
(1 million speakers);
a Sami or Lappish branch (35 000 speakers); as well as
a Mordvin branch, consisting of Erzya (500 000 speakers) and Moksha
(250 000 speakers);
a Mari or Cheremis branch (550 000 speakers); and
a Permi branch, consisting of Udmurt or Votyak (500 000 speakers) and
Komi or Zuryen (350 000 speakers).

Hungarian, Finnish and Estonian are state languages; Sami is spoken in northern
Norway, Sweden and Finland, whereas the Mordvin, Mari, and Permi languages
are spoken in the European territories of Russia.
Hungarian is spoken in Central Europe. It is the state language of Hungary, but
the area where it is a native language also extends to the neighboring countries.
In Hungary it has 10 million speakers, in Romania 2 million speakers, in Slovakia
700 000 speakers, in Yugoslavia 300 000 speakers, in Ukraine 150 000 speakers.
There is also a Hungarian minority in Croatia, Slovenia, and Austria, and a considerable diaspora in Western Europe, North America, South America, Israel, and
Australia.
The period in which the Finno-Ugric peoples represented a kind of linguistic
and areal unity is believed to have lasted until 2000 BC. On the basis of linguistic evidence – e.g. the habitat of the plants and animals whose names are
shared by the Finno-Ugric languages – the Finno-Ugric homeland is located on the
south-western slopes of the Ural mountains. The Hungarian language must have
1

2

The syntax of Hungarian

emerged here from among the Ugric dialects after 1000 BC. The Hungarian tribes
left the Finno-Ugric homeland in the fifth century AD, and occupied the territory
surrounded by the Carpathian mountains in 895. In the period of migration, the
language had been subject to heavy Turkic influence. After the Hungarian tribes
settled in Central Europe, the Slavic languages and German had a noticeable impact
on Hungarian.
The first written Hungarian records are Hungarian fragments in a Greek and a
Latin text, dating from 950 and 1055, respectively. The first two surviving coherent
written Hungarian texts originated in 1192–95, and in 1300. Interestingly, they are
still to a large extent comprehensible to the present-day reader. Hungarian is also
fairly homogeneous areally; the only dialect displaying substantial lexical, phonological, and syntactic differences from standard Hungarian is the easternmost,
archaic Csángó dialect spoken in Romania.

1.2

A general overview of the syntactic and morphosyntactic
features of Hungarian

Hungarian is often referred to as a free word-order language, because
the grammatical functions of subject, object, etc. are not linked to invariant structural positions in the sentence. Thus, a transitive verb and its two arguments, e.g.
keresi ‘seeks’ János ‘John’ Marit ‘Mary-ACC’ can form a sentence in any of the
theoretically possible SVO, SOV, OVS, OSV, VSO, and VOS combinations:
(1)

János keresi Marit.
János Marit keresi.
Marit keresi János.

Marit János keresi.
Keresi János Marit.
Keresi Marit János.

A closer scrutiny, however, makes it clear that the order of major sentence
constituents is just as strictly constrained in Hungarian as it is, for example, in
English or French – merely the functions associated with the different structural positions are logical functions instead of the grammatical functions subject,
object, etc.
The Hungarian sentence can be divided primarily into a topic part and a predicate part. The topic, functioning as the logical subject of predication, names the
individual that will be predicated about in the sentence. The topic role is independent of the function ‘grammatical subject’; in other words, an action or state can
be predicated about any of its participants. Thus, in (2a) the agent, or grammatical
subject, and in (2b) the theme, or grammatical object, occupies the position associated with the topic function. (Since in English the topic and the grammatical

Introduction

3

subject roles have to coincide, (2b) is translated by a passive sentence. Hungarian
(2b), however, differs from (2a) only in its word order.)
(2) a.

[Top János] [Pred fel hı́vta Marit]1
John
up called Mary-ACC2
‘John called up Mary.’

b.

[Top Marit] [Pred fel hı́vta János]
Mary-ACC up called John-NOM
‘Mary was called up by John.’

As for the predicate of the sentence, its central element is the verb (V). The
postverbal positions are argument positions. The verb usually has a so-called verb
modifier (VM), i.e., a non-referential complement incorporated into it, acting as
an aspectual operator, as in (3):
(3)

[Top János] [Pred fel ásta a kertet]
John
up dug the garden-ACC
‘John dug up the garden.’

The preverbal section of the predicate phrase contains operator positions. The verb
may be immediately preceded by a focus constituent, expressing exhaustive identification (N.B. small capitals are used in the Hungarian text here and throughout
the book to mark focus, indicating its phonological prominence):
(4) a.

[Top János ] [Pred MARIT
kérte fel]
John
Mary-ACC asked VM
‘As for John, it was Mary that he asked for a dance.’

b.

[Top Marit ] [Pred JÁNOS
kérte fel]
Mary-ACC John-NOM asked VM
‘As for Mary, it was John who asked her for a dance.’

The focus position is preceded by a distributive quantifier position, the locus of
universal quantifiers and is ‘also’ phrases; for example:
1

When the verbal prefix precedes the verb, they are traditionally spelled as one word.
Nevertheless, I often spell them as two separate words in this book, in order to express
the fact that they represent two separate syntactic constituents.
2
Hungarian is an agglutinating language, in which morphosyntactic elements are rightadjoined to the lexical root. In cases when the morphosyntactic elements play no role in
the discussion, the order of the stem and the suffix may be reversed in the glosses in order
to facilitate understanding; i.e., example (i) may be glossed as (iii), instead of the more
precise (ii).
(i)
(ii)
(iii)

Siettek
iskolába.
hurried-they school-to
they.hurried to.school

4

The syntax of Hungarian

(5) a.

[Pred Marit is
JÁNOS
kérte fel]
Mary-ACC too John-NOM asked VM
‘(In the case of ) Mary, too, it was John who asked her for a dance.’

b.

[Pred Mindenki MARIT
kérte fel]
everybody Mary-ACC asked VM
‘(For) everybody, it was Mary that he asked for a dance.’

As is clear from the examples, the preverbal operator positions, too, are filled with
no regard to the grammatical function of the filler.
The preverbal operator field of the predicate phrase can also contain negation in
addition to the identificational focus and the distributive quantifiers. The negative
particle occupies either the immediately preverbal position or the immediately
prefocus position, or both simultaneously. The lower negative particle negates the
VP – i.e., essentially the propositional content of the clause – whereas the higher
negative particle negates the identification expressed by the focus.
(6) a.

János nem hı́vta fel Marit.
John not called up Mary-ACC
‘John did not call up Mary.’

b.

János nem MARIT hı́vta fel.
‘As for John, it was not Mary that he called up.’

c.

János nem MARIT nem hı́vta fel.
‘As for John, it was not Mary that he did not call up.’

The negative particle triggers negative concord among universal quantifiers and
indefinites, i.e., its universally quantified clause-mates, and the indefinites in its
scope have a special negative form:
(7)

János senkinek
nem mondott semmit.3
John nobody-DAT not said
nothing-ACC
‘John did not say anything to anybody.’

Examples (6a) and (6b), displaying preverbal negation and prefocus negation
respectively, also call attention to a very characteristic property of Hungarian:
operators precede and c-command their scope, i.e., Hungarian sentences are disambiguated scopally.
In sum: the Hungarian sentence structure to be argued for in this book is a
hierarchical structure falling into a topic part and a predicate part, with the predicate
part containing a V-initial propositional kernel as well as preverbal operators.4
For arguments that the negative particle + focus string in (6b,c) is not an instance of
constituent negation, and for details of negative concord, see Chapter 6.
4
For the first formulations of this theory, see Brassai (1860, 1863–65), and É. Kiss (1977).
3

Introduction

5

Chapters 2–6 of this book are devoted to establishing the precise configuration of the structural positions illustrated above, analyzing the operations filling
them: examining their trigger, the constraints they are subject to, the semantic
consequences they bring about, etc. Chapter 2 discusses the topic position, the
topic function, and the operation of topicalization. Chapter 3, dealing with the
core of the predicate phrase, examines, on the one hand, the properties, relative
order, and hierarchical relations of postverbal arguments and, on the other hand,
the properties of the verb modifier, acting as an aspectual operator. Chapter 4 describes the focus position, and the syntax and semantics of focussing/exhaustive
identification. Chapter 5 is devoted to questions of quantification: the position of
the distributive quantifier, the operation of quantifier raising, scope interpretation,
and the like. Chapter 6 discusses negation, including negative concord. Operator movement across clause boundaries is examined in Chapter 10, dealing with
subordination.
Hungarian lacks well-known manifestations of the structural prominence of the
subject over the object. For instance, in English a subject pronoun and the genitive
specifier of the object display disjoint reference; whereas an object pronoun and
the genitive specifier of the subject can also corefer, as follows from Binding
Condition C applied to an asymmetrical SVO (subject–verb–object) structure. In
Hungarian, we find disjoint reference in both cases; compare:
(8) a.
b.

* Hei loves Johni ’s mother.
Johni ’s mother loves himi .

(9) a.

* Ői szereti Jánosi anyját.
hei loves Johni ’s mother

b.

* Jánosi anyja szereti őti .
Johni ’s mother loves himi

The question whether the Hungarian VP is flat, with the subject and the object being
sisters, or is configurational, with the subject asymmetrically c-commanding the
object, was in the focus of interest in the 1980s and inspired a large amount of
literature.5 The arguments for and against a flat VP are summarized in Chapter 3.
The question will also be addressed as to whether the assumption of a flat VP
is compatible with current assumptions about the possible format of syntactic
structures.
The apparent freedom of Hungarian word order – i.e., the attested parallelism between the syntactic behavior of the subject, object, and other arguments – and their
equal eligibility for operator movement must be related to the fact that Hungarian
5

See, among others, É. Kiss (1981, 1987a, 1987b), Horvath (1986a, 1986b, 1987), Marácz
(1986b, 1989).

6

The syntax of Hungarian

morphology is very rich. Hungarian is a nominative–accusative language with 18
cases, all of which appear to be lexically selected. (Hungarian has no grammaticalfunction-changing transformations such as passivization.) There is no evidence of
the assignment/licensing of particular Cases being linked to particular sentence
positions. Accordingly, the lack of a thematic subject does not give rise to an
expletive.
Hungarian displays agreement in several areas of grammar. The verb agrees not
only with the subject, but also with the object if it is definite. In the possessive
construction the head noun bears an agreement suffix reflecting the person and
number of the possessor. In postpositional constructions the postposition agrees
in person and number with its pronominal complement. Hungarian also has a type
of inflected infinitive, agreeing with its dative-marked subject. The phrase types
displaying agreement all license pro-drop. Verb morphology is discussed briefly in
Chapter 3, dealing with the VP. Nominal, postpositional, and infinitival inflection
are analyzed in Chapters 7, 8, and 9, respectively. Inflectional morphology is treated
as part of syntax.
The chapters analyzing the inner structure of the noun phrase (NP) and the
postpositional phrase (PP) will reveal a great degree of parallelism between the
extended VP, and the extended noun phrase/PP. Greenbergian typologies (e.g.
Greenberg 1966) categorize Hungarian as a head-final language, in part because
the structures of the noun phrase, the attributive adjective phrase, and the postpositional phrase are head final on the surface. However, the VP and the CP are clearly
head initial, and the predicative adjective phrase need not be head final, either. This
book derives all phrase types from a head-initial base, by subjecting the post-head
complement to extraposition, incorporation, or phrase-internal topicalization. For
example, in the case of the noun phrase, a post-head complement must be removed
because it would block the merging of the head noun with case. Hungarian postpositions are morphosyntactic suffixes, and, as such, they must be right-adjoined
to their complement; that is why we attest a DP P order instead of the underlying
P DP.
Although Hungarian differs from the best-known Indo-European languages,
particularly English, in obvious ways, its basic syntactic properties are not at all
unique. Sámuel Brassai, the first linguist to identify the outlines of Hungarian
sentence structure, realized already in the middle of the nineteenth century that
the topic–predicate articulation relates to the subject–predicate structure attested
in some Indo-European languages as the general relates to the specific. That is,
the subject–predicate articulation is a topic–predicate structure with the target
of topicalization restricted to the grammatical subject (compare Brassai 1860,
1863–65). The generative framework also provides a clue as to the reason for this
restriction: in subject–predicate languages the subject can assume nominative case

Introduction

7

only if it is raised to Spec,IP. In Spec,IP it is closer to the topic position than the
other arguments, hence it is topicalizable more economically.6
The immediately preverbal identificational focus of Hungarian is also a property
shared by a great many languages. For example, in an examination of 35 European
languages, 27 languages were found to have an invariant structural position associated with the function of identificational focus, and in 18 of these languages the
focus position was found to be immediately preverbal.7
The distributive quantifier position at the head of the predicate phrase may not be
a feature unique to Hungarian, either. Observations concerning Arabic (compare
Khalaily 1995), KiLega (Kinyalolo 1990), Chinese (Bartos 2000b), etc. suggest
that universal quantifiers – irrespective of their grammatical function – gravitate
to a fixed position in other languages, as well.
An interesting open question is whether there are also other languages besides
Hungarian in which the subject and the object behave in a parallel way in so many
areas of syntax. The possibility of a head bearing a sister relation to all of its complements is not an option directly predicted by current theoretical assumptions.
According to the Linear Correspondence Axiom of Kayne (1994) the hierarchical
asymmetry of structural relations ensures their unambiguous mapping onto linear
order. Kayne claims that the symmetry of a structural relation, i.e., the impossibility of its linearization, leads to the crashing of the derivation. Perhaps under
appropriate conditions, however, the lack of asymmetry might result in a partially
linearized structure of the type represented by the Hungarian VP, in which the
head – asymmetrically c-commanding its complements – occupies initial position; the post-head arguments, mutually c-commanding each other, on the other
hand, can stand in any order. There may also be other ways of reconciling a flat
VP with Kayne’s antisymmetry theory; for example one might argue that the flat
VP represents an intermediate stage of the derivation, with the traces of the initial,
asymmetric stage deleted.
The description of Hungarian syntax presented in this book adopts the basic
theoretical assumptions and the basic methodology of generative linguistics.
However, the approach is empirical rather than technical; the goal of the analyses
is to present the theoretically relevant facts of Hungarian explicitly, but without
necessarily providing accounts in terms of the most recent theoretical innovations.
6

The claim that the subject in a subject–predicate language is, in fact, moved to topic
position can be checked by examining if subjects unsuitable for the topic role – e.g.
non-specific indefinites – occupy the same position that topicalizable subjects occupy. A
large amount of evidence indicates that non-specific subjects stay in a predicate-internal
subject position in subject–predicate languages, as well (compare É. Kiss 1996, 1998c,
Diesing 1992).
7
The details of the investigation, performed in the framework of the EUROTYP project of
the European Science Foundation, appeared in É. Kiss (1998c).

2

The topic–predicate articulation
of the sentence
2.1

The topic function

Although in the Hungarian sentence the complements of the verb, including the subject, can appear in various permutations (1), the syntactic structure
of the sentence is constant, with its units expressing invariant logical-semantic
functions.
(1) a.

b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

A védők
sokáig tartották a várat
a törökök ellen.
the defenders long held
the fort-ACC the Turks against
‘The defenders held the fort against the Turks for a long time.’
A védők sokáig tartották a törökök ellen a várat.
A várat sokáig tartották a védők a törökök ellen.
A várat sokáig tartották a törökök ellen a védők.
A törökök ellen sokáig tartották a védők a várat.
A törökök ellen sokáig tartották a várat a védők.

The sentences in (1a–f ) all express predication about the referent of their initial
constituent. Although they describe the same event (the event of the defenders
holding the fort against the Turks for a long time), they formulate it as statements
about different participants of the event. (1a,b) make a statement about the defenders (that they held the fort against the Turks for a long time), (1c,d) make a
statement about the fort (that the defenders held it against the Turks for a long
time), whereas (1e,f) make a statement about the Turks (that the defenders held
the fort against them for a long time). That is, the sentences all instantiate a similar
predication relation, with the initial constituent functioning as the logical subject
of predication, and the rest of the sentence functioning as the logical predicate. In
order to avoid confusion of the notions of logical subject of predication, and grammatical subject, the logical subject of predication is referred to here by the term
‘topic’. So, the Hungarian sentence primarily divides into a topic and a predicate,
with the topic expressing the following function:
8

The topic–predicate articulation of the sentence

9

(2)

The topic function
The topic foregrounds an individual (a person, an object, or a group of them)
from among those present in the universe of discourse as the subject of the
subsequent predication.

2.2

The formal features of the topic constituent

As is clear from the examples in (1a–e), the topic role is not linked
to a particular grammatical function. Subjects are in fact more frequent topics
than objects – but the link between subjecthood and topichood is only indirect.
We tend to describe events from a human perspective, as statements about their
human participants – and subjects are more often [+human] than objects are. In
the case of verbs with a [–human] subject and a [+human] accusative or oblique
complement, the most common permutation is that in which the accusative or
oblique complement occupies the topic position (3a,b). When the possessor is the
only human involved in an action or state, the possessor is usually topicalized (3c).
(3) a.

[Topic Jánost] [Predicate elütötte egy autó]
John-ACC
hit
a car
‘A car hit John. [John was hit by a car.]’

b.

[Topic Jánosból] [Predicate hiányzik a becsület]
from.John
is.missing the honesty
‘Honesty is missing from John. [John lacks honesty.]’

c.

[Topic Jánosnak] [Predicate összetörték az autóját]
John-DAT
they.broke the car-POSS-ACC
‘They broke John’s car. [John had his car broken.]’

The topic, naming a participant of the action or state to be described in the sentence, represents an argument of the verb, i.e., it binds an argument position in the
predicate part. (This formal criterion helps us to distinguish topics from sentence
adverbials, which are predicate-external constituents not functioning as logical
subjects of predication.) Since the topic denotes an individual (a person, a thing,
or a group of persons or things), it is represented by a referring expression.1 Thus,
1

The notion of referentiality must be somewhat relaxed, though, for this statement to be
tenable. Thus generics can also be topicalized – see (i) and (ii) – but they can be said to
refer to kinds.
(i)

A nők
szeretik megosztani a
problémáikat.
the women like
to.share
their problems
‘Women like to share their problems.’

(ii)

Egy nő
szereti megosztani a problémáit.
a woman likes to.share
her problems
(continued overleaf )

10

The syntax of Hungarian

arguments with an operator feature, e.g. quantifiers, cannot be topicalized:
(4) a.

b.

* [Topic Kik] [Predicate meg védték a várat
a törökök ellen]?
who-PL
VM defended the fort-ACC the Turks against
‘Who defended the fort against the Turks?’
* [Topic Kevés várat] [Predicate meg védtek a zsoldosok a törökök ellen]
few fort-ACC
VM defended the mercenaries the Turks against
‘Few forts were defended against the Turks by the mercenaries.’

The topic picks an individual as the subject of the subsequent predication from
among those already present in the universe of discourse; therefore, it must be
represented by a constituent associated with an existential presupposition. Thus,
a proper name or a definite noun phrase (or a postpositional phrase containing
a proper name or a definite noun phrase) is a possible topic; an indefinite noun
phrase, however, can only be topicalized if it is specific in the sense of Enç (1991),
i.e., if its referent is the subset of a referent already present in the universe of
discourse. From a different perspective: a topicalized indefinite noun phrase always requires a specific (i.e., partitive) interpretation. Consequently, the topicalization of a predicate-internal indefinite noun phrase brings about an interpretational
difference:
(5) a.

[Predicate Meg állt
egy autó a házunk előtt]
VM stopped a car our house before
‘A car has stopped in front of our house.’

b.

[Predicate Egy autó állt meg a házunk előtt]
‘A car has stopped in front of our house.’

c.

[Topic Egy autó] [Predicate meg állt a házunk előtt]
‘One of the cars has stopped in front of our house.’

In (5a,b), the predicate-internal egy autó ‘a car’ is likely to be non-specific, serving
to introduce a car into the domain of discourse. The topicalized egy autó in (5c),
on the other hand, can only be understood specifically, meaning ‘one of the aforementioned cars’. The [+specific] feature required of topicalized indefinite noun
phrases is in fact also shared by definite noun phrases. (Since a definite noun phrase
is identical with a previously introduced referent, and since the identity relation
is a sub-type of the subset relation, its referent always represents a subset of a
As is shown below, existential quantifiers of the valaki, valami ‘somebody, something’
type can also appear in topic position; however, they can be said to behave like indefinites,
which function either as referential expressions or as bound variables. Valaki-type expressions are topicalizable only when used referentially. Apparently universal quantifiers can
also be topicalized if they are contrasted. However, as will be argued in Section 2.7, a
contrasted quantifier functions as the name of a set property.

The topic–predicate articulation of the sentence

11

referent already present in the domain of discourse, hence it is always specific.)
Consequently, specificity – similar to referentiality – can be regarded as a necessary
feature of topic constituents; that is:
(6)

The formal features of topic
A topic constituent must be [+referential] and [+specific].

The generalization in (6) appears, at first sight, to be contradicted by the fact that
a set of so-called existential quantifiers – those involving the morpheme vala‘some’ – can also appear in topic position; for example:
(7) a.

b.

[Topic Valaki] [Predicate kopog]
somebody
knocks
‘Somebody is knocking.’
[Topic Valami ] [Predicate le esett a tetőről]
something
VM fell the roof-from
‘Something has fallen from the roof.’

In fact, valaki ‘somebody’ and valami ‘something’ refer to individuals in (7a,b);
what is more, they are also specific in a certain sense. These sentences are adequate
utterances in situations in which the existence of an unidentified person or object
has been inferred – e.g. when knocking has been heard at the door, or an object
has been seen flying past the window, respectively. If ‘specificity’ is understood
to mean ‘association with an existential presupposition’, then valaki and valami
in sentences like (7a,b) count as specific, hence the generalization in (6) can be
maintained.

2.3

The marking of the topic–predicate boundary

The set of examples in (5a–c) raises the question what evidence we
have for the claim that the sentence-initial noun phrase in (5b) is inside the predicate, whereas that in (5c) is external to it, occupying the topic position. The most
obvious clue is stress: the first obligatory stress, which also represents the heaviest grammatical stress in the sentence, falls on the first major constituent of the
predicate.2 (In Hungarian, phrasal stress – similar to word stress – falls on the
left edge, i.e., the Nuclear Stress Rule of Chomsky and Halle (1968) operates in
a direction opposite to that attested in English.) The topic – like noun phrases
referring to a previously introduced individual, in general – usually does not bear
a primary stress. If it denotes an individual present in the universe of discourse,
2

By ‘grammatical stress’ I mean stress not affected by pragmatic factors.

12

The syntax of Hungarian

but not mentioned in the current discussion, it does receive stress, but – since it
represents a separate domain of stress assignment – its stress will never be heavier
than the stress on the left edge of the predicate.
The fact that the clause-initial constituent of (5b) occupies the predicate-internal
focus position is also indicated by the fact that it is adjacent to the verb. The focus
can be analysed to attract the verb across the verb modifier. A topic, on the other
hand, never triggers verb movement. That is, a noun phrase followed by a ‘V VM’
sequence is a predicate-internal focus (8a); a noun phrase followed by a ‘VM V’
sequence, on the other hand, is a predicate-external topic (8b).
(8) a.
b.

[Predicate DP V VM . . .]
DP [Predicate VM V . . .]

When we are in doubt, e.g. when the verb has no verb modifier, and the V-movement
triggered by the focus would be vacuous, therefore invisible, we can locate the
topic–predicate boundary by finding the rightmost position where a sentence adverbial can be inserted. Sentence adverbials can precede or follow the topic, but
cannot enter the predicate. On the basis of this generalization we predict that the
predicate-internal initial constituent of (5b) cannot be followed by a sentence adverbial, but the predicate-external initial constituent of (5c) can. The prediction is
borne out:
(9) a.

b.

2.4

* Egy autó remélhetőleg állt
meg a házunk előtt.
a car hopefully
stopped VM our house before
‘A car has hopefully stopped in front of our house.’
Egy autó remélhetőleg meg állt a házunk előtt.

The topic projection

The topic constituent, representing an argument of the verb, is assumed
to have been preposed from the VP, binding an argument position in it. In the
generative framework, in which all syntactic categories are endocentric, the landing
site of topic movement is assumed to be the specifier position of a functional
projection called TopP. Its abstract head, Top, can be conceived of as an element
establishing a predication relation between the constituent in its specifier position,
a noun phrase of topic function, and the constituent in its complement position, a
verb phrase of predicate function; for example:

The topic–predicate articulation of the sentence

13

TopP

(10)

Spec

Top'
Top

VP
V

DP

DP

Jánosi

keresi

ti

Marit

John

seeks

Mary-ACC

Topic movement is A-bar movement, but not operator movement. The topic is
not a logical operator; e.g. it does not take scope – although, being a referential
expression, it can be assigned a maximally wide scope existential quantifier.
A sentence can contain more than one topic. A sentence with two topics expresses predication about a pair of the participants of the given event or state. The
two topics appear at the head of the sentence in an arbitrary order. We can assume
that in such cases TopP is iterated. That is:
TopP

(11) a.

Top'

Spec
Jánosi
Top

TopP
Top'

Spec
Maritj

Or: b.

Top

XP

mindenütt

kereste ti tj.

John

Mary-ACC everywhere sought

Mariti

Jánosj

mindenütt

kereste ti tj.

It is not clear how this type of topicalization can be fit into the Minimalist
framework, where movement is always a last resort, triggered by the need for
checking a morphological feature. One of the problems is that the features involved
in licensing topicalization, [+referential] and [+specific], are not morphological
features. The fact that not all [+referential], [+specific] constituents must move
out of the VP to Spec,TopP visibly is also difficult to handle. We might assume

14

The syntax of Hungarian

that it is the strong [+referential], [+specific] features of the abstract Top head that
need to be checked by the matching features of an argument – but then it remains
unclear what causes the optional movement of a second or a third [+referential],
[+specific] constituent to further Spec,TopP positions.

2.5

Apparent and real topicless sentences. The (in)deﬁniteness effect

Examples (5a) and (5b) do not contain a visible topic, which can mean either that not all Hungarian sentences project a TopP, or that Spec,TopP is sometimes
filled by an invisible element. A closer examination of possible and impossible
topicless sentences will lead to the conclusion that both of these statements are
true simultaneously.
Sentences with no visible topic fall into two major types. They may be sentences
which describe an event as a compact unit, without predicating it of one of its
participants; for example:
(12) a.

Megkezdődött a tanév.
began
the school-year
‘The school-year has begun.’

b.

Emelkedik a részvényindex.
is.rising the stock-index
‘The stock index is rising.’

c.

Árulják a
lakásukat
a szomszédaim.
are.selling their apartment-ACC my neighbors-NOM
‘My neighbors are selling their apartment.’

d.

Lelőtte valaki
a trónörököst.
shot somebody the heir.to.the.throne-ACC
‘Someone has shot the heir to the throne.’

A set of verbs – those expressing ‘being’, or ‘coming into being’, or ‘appearing
(in the domain of discourse)’ – are particularly common in this construction; for
example:
(13) a.

b.

Van elég
pénz.
is enough money
‘There is enough money.’
Született egy gyerek.
was.born a child
‘A child was born.’

The topic–predicate articulation of the sentence
c.

Érkezett néhány vonat.
arrived some train
‘Some trains arrived.’

d.

Alakult két új egyesület.
formed two new union
‘Two new unions (were) formed.’

e.

Keletkezett egy tó.
arose
a lake
‘A lake arose.’

15

Since these sentences assert the (coming into) being of their subject, the referent
of their subject does not exist independently of the event described in the sentence.
The fact that the existence of their subject cannot be presupposed means that
their subject cannot be specific (see Szabolcsi 1986). Indeed, these sentences are
ungrammatical with a definite subject, or with a universal quantifier (which is also
claimed to be specific by Enç 1991):
(14) a. * Van minden pénz.
is every money
b. * Született Péter.
was.born Peter
c. * Érkezett a vonat.
arrived the train
d. * Alakult a diákok egyesülete.
formed the students’ union
e. * Keletkezett mindegyik tó.
arose
every
lake

Since specificity is a necessary condition of topichood, examples (13a–e) do not
have a topicalizable constituent.
What we have attested in these Hungarian sentences is in fact the well-known
(in)definiteness effect.3 Within the framework of a standard subject–predicate analysis, the reason for the (in)definiteness effect remains unclear, i.e., the necessity of
keeping an indefinite subject inside the predicate and (in some languages) filling the
subject position with an expletive cannot be explained (cf. Chomsky 1995: Section
4.9). From the perspective of Hungarian the English there is . . . construction also
becomes comprehensible – provided we assume, following Brassai (1860), that the
3

On the (in)definiteness/(non)specificity effect in Hungarian, see Szabolcsi (1986), É. Kiss
(1995c), L. Kálmán (1995), Alberti (1997b), and Maleczki (1995, 1999).

16

The syntax of Hungarian

subject–predicate structure of English is in fact a topic–predicate structure, with the
set of topicalizable arguments restricted to the subject. Since in the given sentence
type the existence of the subject is asserted, the subject must be a [–specific] noun
phrase with no existential presupposition, therefore it cannot be topicalized, and
must remain in the predicate.4
The question arises as to why the group of predicates allowing no specific subject
appears to be larger in Hungarian than it is in English. To be able to answer this
question, we have to be aware of the fact that nearly all of the Hungarian verbs
triggering the indefiniteness (more precisely, the non-specificity) effect also have
a counterpart containing the verb modifier meg, and these counterparts require a
specific subject; for example:
(15) a.

Minden pénz meg van.
all
money VM is
‘All the money is there.’

b.

Meg született a baba / A baba meg született.
VM was.born the baby
‘The baby has been born.’

c.

Meg érkezett az Orient Expressz. / Az Orient Expressz meg érkezett.
VM arrived the Orient Express
‘The Orient Express has arrived.’

d.

Meg alakult a diákok egyesülete / A diákok egyesülete meg alakult.
VM formed the students’ union
‘The students’ union has been formed.’

These verbs do not in fact tolerate a non-specific subject, e.g. a bare plural, which
has no specific interpretation:5
(16) a. * Meg vannak adományok.
VM are
donations
b. * Meg születtek gyerekek.
VM were.born children
c. * Meg érkeztek vonatok.
VM arrived trains
d. * Meg alakultak
egyesületek.
VM were.formed unions
4

É. Kiss (to appear) gives a more explicit formulation of this hypothesis. She argues that
the regular surface position of non-specific subjects in English is Spec,IP, which is inside
the predicate. Specific subjects have to move on from Spec,IP to Spec,TopP. In the there
is . . . construction the indefinite subject cannot be raised even to Spec,IP because it must
be bound, hence c-commanded, by the existential quantifier implicit in is.
5
Evidence for the claim that bare plurals are always non-specific is provided in É. Kiss
(1995c).

The topic–predicate articulation of the sentence

17

Lacking a thorough semantic analysis, we can only speculate on the role that the
verb modifier meg plays in changing the subcategorization frame of the verbs in
question (i.e., in making them take a specific subject instead of a non-specific one).
In the unmarked case, meg serves to turn a process verb into perfective; for example:
(17) a.

János fésülködött.
John combed.himself
‘John was combing himself.’

b.

János meg fésülködött.
John VM combed.himself
‘John has combed himself.’

The verbs under consideration (except van ‘be’), however, are verbs of achievement
denoting an indivisible event, which are interpreted perfectively even without meg.
Intuitively the sentences under (13) differ from their counterparts with meg in
what represents the main assertion in them. Whereas in the sentences without a
verb modifier the lexical content of the predicate (i.e., the coming into being of an
individual) is asserted, the versions containing meg assert primarily that this event
has been completed. Since the sentences with meg presuppose rather than assert
the (coming into) being of an individual, the presupposition of the existence of the
individual does not lead to tautology any more; this is why the subjects in (15a–d)
can be specific, even definite, and can also be topicalized.
The indefiniteness effect triggered by the verbs in (13) is also cancelled in the
presence of an identificational focus – because then it is the exhaustive identification of a circumstance of the coming into being of an individual that represents
the main assertion. This is what we attest in (18a–c):
(18) a.

Péter TAVALY született.
Peter last.year was.born
‘Peter was born LAST YEAR.’

b.

A vonat KÉSŐN érkezett.
the train late arrived
‘The train arrived LATE.’

c.

A tó A GLECCSER ALJÁBAN keletkezett.
the lake the glacier’s bottom-at arose
‘The lake arose at the bottom of the glacier.’

Example (18a) asserts that the coming into being of Peter took place last year;
(18b) asserts that the appearance of the train took place late, whereas (18c) asserts
that the coming into being of the lake took place at the bottom of the glacier.
Not only is the coming into being of an individual presupposed in each case, but
the resulting individual is presupposed as well – hence the indefiniteness/nonspecificity requirement on the subject is replaced by a specificity requirement. The

18

The syntax of Hungarian

English equivalents of the Hungarian indefiniteness effect verbs – other than be –
are not recognized as such, presumably because in English the sentence variants in
which the lexical content of the VP is asserted are syntactically not distinguishable
from the variants in which it is presupposed, neutralizing the indefiniteness effect.6
The topicless sentences illustrated in (12)–(13) are eventive sentences, denoting
transitory stages of the universe. (In the terminology of Kratzer (1995), they are
sentences with a stage-level predicate.) Non-eventive, stative sentences, or, in
the terminology of Kratzer (1995), sentences with an individual-level predicate,
are marked without a topic; e.g. the following sentences are only acceptable as
emphatic exclamations (% indicates that the example is acceptable only in a special
context):
(19) a. % Kék szeműek voltak a gyerekek.
blue-eyed
were the children
b. % Szereti János Marit.
loves John Mary-ACC

Kratzer’s theory of the stage-level/individual-level distinction (1995) enables us to
rule out (19a,b) as neutral sentences without also ruling out the topicless (12) and
(13). In Kratzer’s approach the crucial difference between the stage-level (19a,b)
and the individual-level (12)–(13) lies in the fact that the stage-level predicates of
the former also have a spatiotemporal argument, represented by a variable, which
can be associated with temporal and spatial restrictors. In the unmarked case,
the temporal and spatial restrictors occupy the topic position of the sentence; for
example:
(20)

[TopP Magyarországon az idén [Predicate kétszer is megáradtak a folyók]]
in.Hungary
this year
twice also flooded
the rivers
‘This year in Hungary rivers have flooded twice.’

A temporal or spatial expression in Spec,TopP is interpreted as a logical subject
of predication (which is especially clear if none of the obligatory arguments of the
verb has also been topicalized). Intuitively, the topicless sentences in (12) and (13)
also express predication about a particular spatiotemporal location: about ‘here
and now’ in the present tense (12b,c) and (13a), and about ‘there and then’ in the
past tense (12a,d) and (13b–e). It seems plausible to assume that these sentences
also project a TopP, and have their Spec,TopP filled: they have a situationally or
contextually bound empty element corresponding to ‘here and now’ or ‘then and
there’ in topic position. Then, if we assume that every sentence must project a nonvacuous TopP, it will follow that the Spec,TopP position of an eventive sentence
does not need a visible filler, because its event variable always licenses an invisible,
6

For arguments that the non-specific subject is inside the predicate also in the English
equivalents of (13a–e), see É. Kiss (1996).

The topic–predicate articulation of the sentence

19

situationally or contextually bound spatiotemporal element in Spec,TopP. Since
stative predicates have no event variable licensing spatiotemporal expressions,
the Spec,TopP position of a stative sentence must always be filled with a visible
argument.
Although these assumptions enable us to derive the grammaticality difference
between (19a,b) and (12)–(13), they are still not sufficient to predict the full range of
facts attested. The problem is that even sentences with an individual-level predicate
can be topicless if they contain a logical operator: a focus (21a), a negative particle
(21b), an optative operator (21c), an interrogative operator (21d), or a universal
quantifier (21e), etc.
(21) a.

KÉK SZEMŰEK a gyerekek, nem BARNA SZEMŰEK.
blue-eyed
the children not brown-eyed
‘The children are blue-eyed, not brown-eyed.’

b.

Nem kék szeműek a gyerekek
not blue-eyed
the children
‘The children are not blue-eyed.’

c.

Bárcsak kék szeműek lennének a gyerekek!
if.only blue-eyed
were
the children
‘If only the children were blue-eyed!’

d.

Szereti János Marit?
loves John Mary-ACC
‘Does John love Mary?’

e.

Mindenkinek küldött Péter egy meghı́vót.
everybody-DAT sent Peter an invitation-ACC
‘Peter sent an invitation to everybody.’

In view of the examples in (21a–e), the hypothesis that all sentences express
predication about a topic is an overgeneralization. Apparently, a sentence either
expresses predication or quantification (i.e., it is either of the Aristotelian or the
Fregean type). A sentence expressing predication is naturally of a topic–predicate
structure. A sentence expressing quantification or, more precisely, a sentence extended by one or more propositional operators, on the other hand, does not need
a topic – but it can have one. A quantified expression, although viable as an independent sentence, can also be predicated of a topic – thus, in addition to (21a–e),
(22a–e) are also grammatical:
(22) a.

b.

[TopP A gyerekek [Predicate KÉK SZEMŰEK, nem BARNA SZEMŰEK]]
the children
blue-eyed
not brown-eyed
‘The children are blue-eyed, not brown-eyed.’
[TopP A gyerekek [Predicate nem kék szeműek]]
the children
not blue-eyed
‘The children are not blue-eyed.’

20

The syntax of Hungarian
c. ? [TopP A gyerekek [Predicate bárcsak kék szeműek lennének!]]
the children
if.only blue-eyed
were
‘If only the children were blue-eyed!’
d.

[TopP János [Predicate szereti Marit?]]
John
loves Mary-ACC
‘Does John love Mary?’

e.

[TopP Péter [Predicate mindenkinek küldött egy meghı́vót]]
Peter
everybody-DAT sent an invitation-ACC
‘Peter sent an invitation to everybody.’

2.6

Sentence adverbials and the topic–predicate articulation

The topic is not the only type of predicate-phrase-external constituent;
sentence adverbials must also precede the predicate. Their position relative to the
topic constituents is not fixed; they can precede them, follow them, or intervene
between them; for example:
(23) a.

b.
c.

A várakozások ellenére/szerencsére a várat
a törökök
the expectations despite/ luckily
the fort-ACC the Turks
[Predicate nem tudták elfoglalni]
not could occupy
‘Despite expectations/luckily, the Turks could not occupy the fort.’
A várat a várakozások ellenére/szerencsére a törökök [Predicate nem tudták
elfoglalni]
A várat a törökök a várakozások ellenére/szerencsére [Predicate nem tudták
elfoglalni]

But:
d. ?* A várat a törökök nem tudták a várakozások ellenére/szerencsére elfoglalni.
e. ?* A várat a törökök nem tudták elfoglalni a várakozások ellenére/szerencsére.

The free order of a sentence adverbial relative to the topic constituents, and its
topic-like prosody might suggest at first sight that it is also a topic. However, it
does not share the semantic features associated with the topic function: it is not
understood as the logical subject of predication, and, accordingly, it does not have
to be either referential or specific. Since it serves to modify the whole statement,
the semantically most plausible position for it would be a position adjoined to the
TopP projection. Such an analysis, however, would run into problems in two types
of structures. In one of them, represented by (23c), the problem can be solved.
Although the sentence adverbial seems to be adjoined to the predicate phrase (in
this case, a NegP) instead of TopP, it fails to bear the primary stress marking the

The topic–predicate articulation of the sentence

21

left edge of the predicate, which indicates that it is external to the predicate phrase,
after all.
The decisive role of stress can be made clear by a minimal pair. A number of
adverbials are ambiguous between a sentence-adverbial and a predicate-adverbial
interpretation. If they are placed between the topic and the predicate, their interpretation depends on their stress. If the first primary stress of the sentence, falling
on the initial constituent of the predicate, is borne by the adverbial, it is evidence of
its predicate adverbial status. If the first primary stress – which is marked throughout by the symbol  – falls on the post-adverbial constituent, the adverbial is a
predicate-external sentence adverbial; for example:
(24) a.

b.

János  okosan meg válaszolta a kérdést.
John cleverly VM answered the question
‘John answered the question cleverly.’
János okosan  meg válaszolta a kérdést.
‘Cleverly, John answered the question.’

The meaning difference between (24a) and (24b) must follow from a positional
difference; that is, if in (24a) okosan is adjoined to the predicate, in (24b) it must
be dominated by a higher projection. It would be legitimate to assume that it is
adjoined to a TopP projection, whose specifier (János) has been extracted, and has
been left-adjoined to the projection dominating okosan. This analysis could also
be extended to (23c), that is, the post-topic position of the sentence adverbial could
always be derived by the leftward movement of topic constituents from behind it.
The insurmountable problem for this approach is represented by the sentence
type which contains a sentence adverbial without projecting a TopP, illustrated in
(25). Such sentences contain no predicate-external projection to which the sentence
adverbial could be adjoined.
(25) a.

b.

A várakozások ellenére [Predicate mindenki megjelent az ünnepélyen]
the expectations despite
everybody appeared the ceremony-at
‘Despite expectations, everybody showed up at the ceremony.’
A várakozások ellenére [Predicate csak JÁNOS volt jelen]
the expectations despite
only John was present
‘Despite expectations, only John was present.’

Since the sentence adverbial has no predicate-external projection to adjoin to, the
only possible solution seems to be to generate it in the specifier of a functional
projection of its own (as proposed by Cinque 1997). Let us call the projection
dominating the sentence adverbials in (23) and (25) Evaluative Phrase, and let us
assume that it can extend a clausal projection containing minimally a predicate
phrase. (Since topics are referential expressions not entering into scopal interaction

22

The syntax of Hungarian

with scope-bearing elements, it is immaterial whether TopP is internal or external
to the Evaluative Phrase dominating the sentence adverbial.)
In view of this, e.g. (23c) has the following structure:
TopP

(26)

TopP

Spec

EvalP

Spec

A várati

a törökökj

Spec

Predicate

a várakozások ellenére

nem tudták elfoglalni ti tj

The contrastive topic7

2.7

In accordance with the fact that the topic serves to foreground an individual from the universe of discourse, the topic constituent is required to be
[+referential] and [+specific]. Surprisingly, however, apparently non-individualdenoting elements – among them bare nouns, adverbs, and also quantifiers – can
be topicalized; this is provided they are pronounced with a particular, contrastive
intonation comprised of a brief fall and a long rise. With the fall on the subsequent
predicate, such sentences have a ‘hat’ contour marked by the symbols / and \:
(27) a.

/Biciklit
\sok lány látott.
bicycle-ACC many girl saw
‘Bicycle, many girls saw.’

b.

/Föl \ LIFTEN
megyek.
up elevator-on go-I
‘Up, I go by elevator.’

c.

/Legalább három regényt \kevés diák olvasott el.
at.least
three novel-ACC few student read
VM
‘At least three novels were read by few students.’

The fall–rise intonation contour of the initial constituents of (27a–c) can also be
associated with a regular individual-denoting topic; for example:
(28) a.

7

/Jánost \nem hı́vom meg.
John-ACC not invite-I VM
‘John, I won’t invite.’

Molnár (1998) provides a very detailed description of the contrastive topic phenomenon
in Hungarian (and German). See also Gyuris (1999).

The topic–predicate articulation of the sentence

23

In this case, however, the fall–rise of the topic is merely a pragmatically motivated
option; it conveys the implicature that there is also an alternative referent for
whom an alternative predicate holds (i.e., there is at least one person other than
János whom I will invite). In (27a–c), on the other hand, the fall–rise contour is
obligatory; the sentences would be ungrammatical without it.
As a first step in the analysis of (27a–c), let us ascertain that the constituents
in question are, indeed, external to the predicate part of their sentences. This is
what the stress pattern of the sentences suggests: the initial constituent precedes
the primary stress on the left edge of the predicate (indicated by the symbol  ).
Furthermore, it can also precede sentence adverbials, which are always external
to the predicate; compare:
(29) a.

/Biciklit
valószı́nűleg \sok lány látott.
bicycle-ACC probably
many girl saw
‘Bicycle, probably many girls saw.’

b.

/Föl valószı́nűleg \ LIFTEN
megyek.
up probably
elevator-on go-I
‘Up, probably I go by elevator.’

c.

/Legalább három regényt valószı́nűleg \kevés diák olvasott el.
at least
three novel-ACC probably
few student read
VM
/At least three novels were probably read by \few students.’

The next question to answer is whether the predicate-external constituent in (27a–c)
is, indeed, a topic sitting in Spec,TopP, or whether a further structural position
should be established for it on the left periphery of the sentence. The plausibility
of the latter view is diminished by the fact that constituents with the fall–rise
contour can freely mingle with topics proper.8 Observe in (30a–c) the possible
relative orders of the quantifier minden kollégáját, pronounced with a fall–rise,
and the two regular topic noun phrases: János and a születésnapjára.
(30) a.

/Minden kollégáját
János a születésnapjára [Predicate \nem szokta
every
colleague.POSS-ACC John his birthday-on
not used
meghı́vni]
to.invite
‘Every colleague of his, John \would not invite for his birthday.’

b.
c.

János /minden kollégáját a születésnapjára [Predicate \nem szokta meghı́vni]
János a születésnapjára /minden kollégáját [Predicate \nem szokta meghı́vni]
etc.

If the constituent with the fall–rise contour occupied a kind of dislocated, hanging
position in the left periphery of the sentence, we would expect it to precede all
8

This point was clarified by Alberti and Medve (2000).

24

The syntax of Hungarian

topicalized constituents. In fact, it behaves as if it were one of the topicalized
constituents – as if it were simply a contrasted/contrastive topic.
There is also evidence external to Hungarian pointing to the same conclusion:
according to the Japanese grammar of Kuno (1973: 46–47), a constituent marked
by the topic morpheme wa in the Japanese sentence is either referential/generic or
contrastive. In other words, a non-referential expression can also be topicalized –
but it must be assigned a contrastive intonation and interpretation. The Japanese
analogy suggests that what licenses a non-individual-denoting expression in
topic position in Hungarian, too, is the contrast expressed by the fall–rise
contour.
The role of contrast has been clarified – in a different context – by Szabolcsi
(1983a). She examined the problem of what licenses the focussing of nonindividual-denoting expressions – when focussing, involving the identification of
a subset of a relevant set and the exclusion of the complementary subset, is an operation which can only be performed on an unordered set of distinct individuals. She
argued that non-individual-denoting expressions are focusable because they can be
individuated by various means, among them by contrast. When we contrast a property denoted by a predicative bare noun with a similar property, then ‘by singling
them out as relevant, we actually kind of individuate those properties, that is, we
disregard the fact that their extensions overlap with the extensions of other properties’ (Szabolcsi 1983a: 140).
Let us adopt Szabolcsi’s insight for the examples in (27) – without also employing her formal semantic apparatus. In (27a) the property bicikli is implicitly
contrasted with a relevant property determined by the context or situation. Suppose it is contrasted with the property ‘motorbike’. Theoretically it is not obvious
whether the extensions of these two properties are distinct, or whether they overlap (what about a clip-on motor?), or perhaps one subsumes the other (after all, a
motorbike is also a bike). Their contrast decides the issue: if they are contrasted,
then they must be distinct. That is, biciklit denotes a distinct property, i.e., it functions practically as a [+referential] constituent. What is more, since the set of the
properties bicikli and motorbicikli must already have been present in the domain of
discourse (or else the listener could not reconstruct the contrast implied), biciklit
is also [+specific], since its referent is the subset of a set of previously introduced
referents. That is, the contrast supplies the bare nominal with both features required
of topics. Accordingly, the bare nominal acts as a topic proper from a logical point
of view; (27a) is understood as a statement about the property ‘bicycle’.
In (27b) the adverb föl ‘up’ is contrasted tacitly with its counterpart le ‘down’.
The fact that it is set into contrast with an adverb denoting the opposite direction
makes it clear that we use it as the name of a direction. Since it denotes a member

The topic–predicate articulation of the sentence

25

of a set of directions present in the domain of discourse, it is not only [+referential]
but also [+specific]; hence, it is a legitimate target of topicalization.
Example (27c), with a contrasted universal quantifier, represents a more complex case. According to É. Kiss (2000b), a quantifier functioning as a contrastive
topic denotes a cardinality property associated with sets. In the case of (27c),
legalább három regényt stands for the property ‘subset of novels of at least three
members’, as opposed to the property ‘subset of novels of at most two members’.
It is predicated about the property ‘subset of novels of at least three members’ that
few students read a representative of it. (An opposite statement is implied about
the alternative property ‘subset of novels of at most two members’, namely, many
students read a representative of it.) The proposed paraphrase of the meaning of
(27c) also makes it clear why quantifiers in contrastive topic position give the
impression of having narrow scope (apparently violating the generalization that in
Hungarian the scope order of preverbal constituents corresponds to their surface
order). A topicalized quantifier functions as the name of a property, and as such
it has maximal scope, and is referentially invariant. The predicate, denoting a set
of concrete actions, however, involves concrete realizations/representatives of this
property, which do not need to coincide but can also be referentially distinct. This
potential referential variance appears to be similar to the referential variance of
narrow scope quantifiers; however, its source is different.

2.8

Summary

Hungarian sentence structure falls primarily into two units: one functioning as a topic and the other functioning as a predicate. The topic names
an individual (a person, thing, or group) from among those present in the universe of discourse, which the predicate will make a statement about. Unlike in
English, the topic does not have to coincide with the grammatical subject; it can
be of any grammatical function. A topic constituent is only constrained in respect
of referentiality: it must have the features [+referential] and [+specific], i.e., it
must be represented by a definite noun phrase, or a specific indefinite one, or a PP
dominating such a noun phrase. In fact, a non-referential phrase (e.g. a bare nominal, an adverb phrase, or a quantifier) can also assume the features [+referential]
and [+specific] and be topicalized if it is contrasted, contrast being a means of
individuation.
The topic is assumed to occupy the specifier position of a TopP projection,
binding an argument position in the VP. A sentence can also have more than one
topic, i.e., the TopP projection can be iterated. Eventive sentences having no visible

26

The syntax of Hungarian

topic are understood to express predication about the situationally or contextually
determined spatiotemporal restriction on their event variable (referring to ‘here and
now’, or ‘there and then’). Both stative and eventive sentences can be topicless if
they involve a logical propositional operator.
The facts of Hungarian also provide an insight into the motivation of the
(in)definiteness/(non-)specificity effect. Predicates asserting the (coming into)
being (in the domain of discourse) of their subject cannot also presuppose the
existence of their subject; so their subject is necessarily non-specific, hence not
topicalizable, confined to a predicate-internal position.

3

The minimal predicate
Having assigned to the Hungarian sentence a binary predication structure,
and having examined the properties of the logical subject of predication, or topic,
we turn to the analysis of the predicate phrase. Categorially the predicate is a VP
merged with morphosyntactic elements such as tense, mood, and agreement, and
either extended into an aspectual phrase, or embedded in operator projections such
as a focus phrase, a distributive quantifier phrase, and/or a negative phrase. The
subject of this chapter is the minimal predicate, consisting of a VP, merged with
morphosyntactic heads, and extended into an AspP, but not involving a focus, a
distributive quantifier, or negation.

3.1

Argument order in the VP

The lexical core of the predicate of the Hungarian sentence is a verb
phrase. It is assumed to be verb initial, with the arguments following the verb in an
arbitrary order – as illustrated in (1). (What motivated the assumption of a verbinitial VP in the late 1970s was that the set of possible permutations of a verb and
its complements could be derived most economically from a V-initial base. Later
theoretical considerations – concerning the direction of theta-role assignment and
Case assignment in Universal Grammar – also confirmed this view.)
(1) a.

b.
c.
d.

[VP Küldött Péter egy levelet
Máriának]
sent
PETER a letter-ACC Mary-DAT
‘Peter sent a letter to Mary.’
[VP Küldött Máriának Péter egy levelet]
[VP Küldött egy levelet Péter Máriának]
[VP Küldött Péter Máriának egy levelet]

Naturally, any of the arguments can undergo topicalization, in which case it will
only be represented by a trace in the VP. The different postverbal orders, although
equally grammatical, are not equally unmarked. Postverbal argument order seems
to depend on the same features that also play a role in topic selection. Namely,
specific constituents tend to precede non-specific ones, and human constituents
27

28

The syntax of Hungarian

tend to precede non-human. Thus (1c), in which a non-specific indefinite noun
phrase precedes two definite noun phrases, is slightly marked. Crucially, postverbal
argument order is not determined by the grammatical functions of arguments.
Consider the following minimal pairs:
(2) a.

b.

Kereste Piroskát
egy biztosı́tási ügynök.
sought Piroska-ACC an insurance agent
‘An insurance agent sought Piroska.’
? Kereste egy biztosı́tási ügynök Piroskát.

(3) a.

Keresett Piroska egy biztosı́tási ügynököt.
sought Piroska an insurance agent-ACC
‘Piroska sought an insurance agent.’

b.

? Keresett egy biztosı́tási ügynököt Piroska.

As (2a,b) and (3a,b) illustrate, either the VSO or the VOS order can be unmarked –
provided the [+referential], [–specific] argument follows the [+referential],
[+specific] one. If both arguments are [+referential] and [+specific], but they are
marked for different values of the feature [+/–human], the [+human] [–human]
order sounds more neutral; for example:
(4) a.

b.
(5) a.

b.

El ütötte Jánost
a Péter autója.
VM hit John-ACC the Peter’s car-NOM
‘Peter’s car hit John.’
? El ütötte a Péter autója Jánost.
Össze törte János
a Péter autóját.
VM broke John-NOM the Peter car-POSS-ACC
‘John broke Peter’s car.’
? Össze törte a Péter autóját János.

Theta role seems to affect postverbal argument order only if the arguments share
every other relevant feature. In that case an agent, or an experiencer (whether
realized as a subject or a dative), is more likely to precede a theme than the other
way round; compare:
(6) a.

Meg állı́totta János Piroskát.
VM stopped John Piroska-ACC
‘John stopped Piroska.’

b.

? Meg állı́totta Piroskát János.

(7) a.

Hiányzik Jánosnak Piroska.
is-missing John-DAT Piroska
‘John is missing Piroska.’

b.

? Hiányzik Piroska Jánosnak.

The minimal predicate

29

Hungarian grammars are not capable of predicting the degree of markedness of the
examples in (2)–(7) – but it is not clear if they should predict it; after all, these sentences are all fully grammatical. (The symbol ? in front of the (b) examples in (4)–
(7) is merely intended to express that these versions are less frequent and somewhat
less natural than the (a) examples.) Perhaps it is a general perceptual strategy that
we appreciate the world proceeding from familiar items to unfamiliar ones, from
humans to non-humans, and from active participants of an event to passive ones.

3.2

The referentiality effect

Arguments with an operator feature (e.g. interrogative phrases or distributive quantifiers) are preposed from the VP into operator positions in the preverbal
section of the predicate. The postverbal argument positions are reserved for referential expressions. An argument represented by a bare nominal must also leave
the VP – see (8a) and (9a). It can only survive in a preverbal A-bar position: as
an aspectual operator (8b), or a focus (9b), or – when supplied with the particle is
‘also’ – as a distributive quantifier (9c).
(8) a.

* János [VP táncolt keringőt]
John
danced waltz-ACC

b.

[János [AspP keringőti táncolt ti ]]
‘John was waltzing.’

(9) a.

* [TopP János [VP táncolt kövér lánnyal]]
John
danced fat girl-with

b.

[TopP János [FP KÖVÉR LÁNNYALi táncolt ti ]]
‘It was (a) fat girl that John danced with.’

c.

[TopP János [DistP kövér lánnyal isi táncolt ti ]]
‘John danced also with (a) fat girl.’

(The prohibition against a non-referential constituent in the VP is essentially only
valid in focusless sentences – presumably because in the presence of a preverbal
focus the postverbal bare nominal can always be interpreted as a focus in situ,
given that a preverbal focus also licenses postverbal foci.1 )
1

Another construction which licenses a postverbal bare nominal is the existential construction; for example:
(i)

János TÁNCOLT kövér lánnyal.
John danced fat girl-with
‘John has danced with a fat girl (at least once).’
(continued overleaf )

30

The syntax of Hungarian

Alberti (1997b) provides the following account of the distribution of grammaticality in (8)–(9). The arguments of the verb can be legitimized in one of two ways.
In the unmarked case they have referential legitimacy, i.e., they serve to identify the
referents that the content of the verb is predicated of. Non-referential expressions
can be legitimized by obtaining predicative legitimacy in the assertive part (i.e., the
operator field) of the predicate. In a neutral sentence the verb represents the (main)
assertion, in other words, the new (non-presupposed) information; however, it can
extend, or transfer its assertive power to elements moved to the preverbal operator
field of the predicate phrase. In this field arguments assume predicative legitimacy
(instead of, or in addition to, referential legitimacy).
The topic position, which, similar to the postverbal field, is only available for
specific referential expressions, can also host a bare nominal if it is contrasted.
(10)

[TopP /Kövér lánnyal [FP JÁNOS [VP táncolt]]]
fat
girl-with John
danced
‘As for fat girls, it was John who danced with one/some.’

As was argued in Section 2.7, a topicalized bare nominal is individuated by being
contrasted; it assumes the status of the name of a property, i.e., it obtains a kind of
referential legitimacy.

3.3

The subject as an internal argument

As has been demonstrated, postverbal arguments can appear in any order.
Since the different orders do not display regular semantic or phonological differences (they are essentially equivalent), they provide no evidence of an invariant
underlying order, or of any movement transformation involved in their derivation.
Hypotheses on Universal Grammar, among them hypotheses on theta theory, however, presuppose a hierarchical VP, in which the subject is more prominent than the
object, the object being c-commanded and assigned a theta role by the V, and the
subject being c-commanded and assigned a theta role by the V + object complex.
The question whether facts of Hungarian concerning the configurational relation
of the subject and object can be reconciled with universal assumptions, or warrant
a different approach was in the focus of interest in the 1980s, and inspired a large
amount of literature. Book-length contributions to the debate included:

r

Horvath (1986a), who assumed a VP-external subject and a VP-internal
object, with the focus in intermediate position, adjoined to the verb;
This construction may also involve a kind of focussing: V movement into the head of the
focus projection.

The minimal predicate

r

31

É. Kiss (1987a), who argued for a flat verb projection including both the
subject and the object; and
Marácz (1989), who claimed that the subject is external to the VP, but
is internal to the operator projections, and ends up in postverbal position
only if an operator triggers V movement across it.

r

Some of the issues debated in the 1980s seem to have been resolved since then.
Thus, it is not an issue any more whether the subject originates in the VP or outside
it. Since then it has become universally accepted that the subject is generated inside
the maximal projection of the verb, and is externalized transformationally so as to
obtain or check its nominative case. In Hungarian the assignment or checking of
the nominative case of the subject clearly does not involve an invariant position
either outside or inside the VP. When the subject is external to the extended VP, it
is in topic position – which is a position that is also available for non-subjects.
Some of the subject–object asymmetries attested in English arise from the fact
that the subject has been extracted from the VP into Spec,IP. If these asymmetries
appear in Hungarian at all, then they appear as topic vs. internal argument asymmetries. That is, if the subject has been topicalized, then we attest the structural
prominence of the subject over the object, and if the object has been topicalized,
then we attest the structural prominence of the object over the subject. For example,
whereas in English VP-deletion always deletes the V + object string, leaving the
subject spelled out, in Hungarian it can also delete the V + subject string, leaving
the object spelled out.
(11) a.

b.

[TopP János [VP ismeri Marit]]; [TopP Péter viszont nem [VP ismeri Marit]].
John
knows Mary-ACC Peter however not
knows Mary-ACC
‘John knows Mary; Peter, on the other hand, doesn’t.’
[TopP Marit [VP ismeri János]]; [TopP Zsuzsát
viszont nem
Mary-ACC knows John-NOM Susan-ACC however not
[VP ismeri János]].
knows John-NOM
‘Mary is known by John; Susan, however, isn’t.’

The Superiority Condition requires that a position be filled with the closest constituent having the appropriate features. Accordingly, in English multiple questions
involving a subject wh-pronoun and an object wh-pronoun, Spec,CP is filled by
the subject pronoun – because the subject in Spec,IP is closer to Spec,CP than the
object is. Since in Hungarian the subject does not leave the VP to assume/check
nominative case, then subject and non-subject wh-phrases in a multiple question
are predicted to be equally available for wh-movement. Indeed, this is what we
find in both types of Hungarian multiple questions (discussed in Section 4.5.2).

32

The syntax of Hungarian

(12) a.

Ki melyik témáról
ı́rt?
who which topic-about wrote
‘Who wrote about which topic?’

b.
(13) a.

b.

Melyik témáról ki ı́rt?
Ki jelentett fel kit?
who denounced VM whom
‘Who denounced whom?’
Kit jelentett fel ki?

A further area displaying an external argument vs. internal argument asymmetry
is idiom interpretation. If the semantic composition of a verb and its arguments
proceeds on phrase structure from bottom to top (a premise not accepted by e.g.
Bresnan 1982), then it follows that in English idiomatic sentences containing a nonidiomatic variable, the idiomatic unit is the VP, and the non-idiomatic variable is the
VP-external subject. In Hungarian idiomatic sentences containing a non-idiomatic
variable, the idiomatic part is also confined to the VP, whereas the non-idiomatic
variable is represented by the topic. The topicalized non-idiomatic element is
usually a [+human] argument of the verb, but not necessarily its subject. It can
also be, for example, an object or a goal. Topicalized possessors are particularly
common; for example:
(14) a.

Jánosnak [AspP ki verte az ág
a szemét]
John-DAT
out poked the branch the eye-POSS-ACC
‘A branch has poked out John’s eye. [John is run down by old age.]’

b.

Jánost [AspP majd meg ütötte a guta]
John-ACC almost VM hit the stroke
‘A stroke almost hit John. [John was upset.]’

c.

Jánost [VP eszi a fene]
John-ACC eats the plague-NOM
‘The plague is eating John. [John is mad (on getting something).]’

d.

Jánost [AspP el kapta a gépszı́j]
John-ACC VM caught the driving-belt-NOM
‘The driving belt has caught John. [John has been roped in.]’

e.

Ezt a tetőt [FP csak az imádság tartja]
this the roof-ACC only the prayer holds
‘Only prayer holds this roof. [This roof is very shaky.]’

In sum: Hungarian does display certain symptoms of an external argument vs. internal argument asymmetry; however, the structurally prominent external argument
of the Hungarian sentence is not the subject, but the topic.

The minimal predicate

33

Whereas the claim that Hungarian provides no empirical evidence for a VPexternal subject position has become more or less generally accepted, it still remains an open question as to whether the subject is more prominent than the object
inside the VP. The facts are controversial; some support the assumption of a flat
VP, others argue for a hierarchical, binary branching verb projection.

3.4

The structure of the VP

3.4.1

Evidence from disjoint reference

The most transparent way of testing the VP-internal hierarchical relation
of the subject and the object is the examination of Binding Condition C effects.
Condition C of Binding Theory states that a referential expression cannot be bound,
i.e., if it is c-commanded by a pronominal, it will be disjoint in reference. In a
structure in which the subject asymmetrically c-commands the object, an object
pronoun does not c-command the genitive specifier of the subject, hence Binding
Condition C does not force disjoint reference on them. A subject pronoun, on
the other hand, c-commands the genitive specifier of the object, and thus cannot
corefer with it. This is what we attest in the following English examples:
(15) a.

b. *
theyi
the boys’i

mother called

themi

called
the boys’i

mother

In Hungarian coreference is impossible in both constructions. This will only follow
from a symmetric structure, in which not only the subject c-commands the (genitive
specifier of the) object, but also the object c-commands the (genitive specifier of
the) subject; compare:
(16) a. * Fel hı́vta őketi a fiúki anyja.
VM called them the boys’ mother-NOM
‘The boys’ mother called them.’
b. * Fel hı́vták (ők) proi a fiúki anyját.
VM called they
the boys’ mother-ACC
‘They called the boys’ mother.’

34

The syntax of Hungarian

The disjoint reference effect illustrated in (16a) cannot be ‘undone’ either by
scrambling within the VP (17a), or by the movement of the subject into the left
periphery of the sentence (17b):
(17) a. * Fel hı́vta a fiúki anyja
őketi .
VM called the boys’ mother-NOM them
‘The boys’ mother called them.’
b. * A fiúki anyja fel hı́vta őketi .
‘The boys’ mother called them.’

Interestingly, as Marácz (1989) noticed, the subject–object asymmetry absent from
the referential relation of a pronominal and a lexical noun phrase does show up in
the relation of two lexical noun phrases:
(18) a.

b.

Fel hı́vta a fiúkati
a fiúki anyja.
VM called the boys-ACC the boys’ mother-NOM
‘The boys’ mother called the boys.’
Fel hı́vta a fiúki anyja a fiúkati .

(19) a. * Fel hı́vták a fiúki
a fiúki anyját.
VM called the boys-NOM the boys’ mother-ACC
‘The boys called the boys’ mother.’
b. * Fel hı́vták a fiúki anyját a fiúki .

If we adopt the hierarchical VP hypothesis, we predict the grammaticality of
(18a,b), but we cannot account for the ungrammaticality of (16a) and (17a,b); we
have to attribute it to some unknown reason. If we adopt the flat VP hypothesis, the
ungrammaticality of (16a,b) and (17a,b) will follow; however, the grammaticality
of (18a,b) cannot be predicted straightforwardly – without an auxiliary hypothesis.
The core of the problem is the grammaticality difference between the structurally identical (16a) and (18a). As these examples demonstrate, the coreference possibilities between a pronoun and a referring expression are more strictly
constrained than those between two referring expressions. If Reinhart (1983) is
right in suggesting that the disjoint reference effect arising between two referring
expressions falls outside the realm of the Binding Conditions,2 then the syntactically relevant example is that in (16a), which argues for a flat VP. Then the
referential relation between two referring expressions has to be accounted for by
an auxiliary principle. This principle appears to be motivated thematically rather
2

According to Reinhart (1983: 170) such a move would not be completely unmotivated.
She claims that ‘it is generally so that the reference of a full NP is more easily recoverable
than the reference of a pronoun, so . . . it should be easier to identify intended coreference
of two identical full NPs than of a pair of a pronoun and full NP . . .’

The minimal predicate

35

than structurally – e.g. whereas in (18)–(19), containing an agent subject and a
theme object, the subject is more prominent than the object, in (20a,b), involving
a theme subject and an experiencer object, the subject and the object are equally
prominent:
(20) a.

b.

3.4.2

Jánosi felesége nem érdekli Jánosti .
John’s wife
not interests John-ACC
‘John’s wife does not interest John.’
Jánosi feleségét nem érdekli Jánosi .
John’s wife-ACC not interests John-NOM
‘John does not interest John’s wife.’

Evidence from anaphora

The clearest evidence for an argument hierarchy operative in Hungarian
grammar is provided by facts of anaphora. Consider the binding possibilities in
the following examples:
(21) a.

János felismerte önmagát
a képen.
John recognized himself-ACC the picture-on
‘John recognized himself in the picture.’

b. * Jánost felismerte önmaga
a képen.
John-ACC recognized himself-NOM the picture-on
‘Himself recognized John in the picture.’
(22) a.

Bemutattam a lányokat egymásnak.
introduced-I the girls-ACC each-other-DAT
‘I introduced the girls to each other.’

b. ? Bemutattam a lányoknak egymást.
introduced-I the girls-DAT each-other-ACC
‘I introduced each other to the girls.’
(23) a. ? Megmutattam a gyereket önmagának a tükörben.
showed-I
the child-ACC himself-DAT the mirror-in
‘I showed the child to himself in the mirror.’
b.

(24) a.

Megmutattam a gyereknek önmagát
a tükörben.
showed-I
the child-DAT himself-ACC the mirror-in
‘I showed the child himself in the mirror.’
Szembesı́tettem Jánost önmagával.
confronted-I
John-ACC himself-with
‘I confronted John with himself.’

b. * Szembesı́tettem Jánossal önmagát.
confronted-I
John-with himself-ACC
‘I confronted himself with John.’

36

The syntax of Hungarian

(25) a.

Gyakran vitatkozom Jánossal önmagáról.
often
argue-I
John-with himself-about
‘I often argue with John about himself.’

b. * Gyakran vitatkozom Jánosról önmagával.
often
argue-I
John-about himself-with
‘I often argue about John with himself.’

According to the evidence of these examples, a subject can bind an accusative
object, but not vice versa. The binding relation between an accusative object and
a dative is also asymmetric; it depends on the verb which can bind the other. In a
sentence containing an accusative and an instrumental, only the former can bind the
latter, whereas in a sentence containing an instrumental and a locative argument,
the instrumental is the potential binder.
Surface order does not alter grammaticality (although the orders in which the
binder precedes the anaphor may sometimes sound better). Thus, the reverse
anaphor–antecedent order in (26a), derived by operator movement, and that in
(26b), derived by VP-internal scrambling, are also perfectly grammatical.
(26) a.

b.

A képen
önmagát
ismerte
fel János.
the picture-on himself-ACC recognized VM John-NOM
‘It was himself that John recognized in the picture.’
Bemutattam egymásnak
a lányokat.
introduced-I each-other-DAT the girls-ACC
‘I introduced the girls to each other.’

If our premise is Binding Condition A in its standard formulation, according to
which an anaphor requires a c-commanding antecedent, the sentences in (21)–
(25) provide evidence for an articulated VP-internal argument hierarchy, in which
the nominative complement occupies the highest position, and the complement
in a locative case occupies the lowest one. Examples (22)–(23) somewhat blur
the picture though: we must conclude that in (22) the accusative c-commands the
dative, whereas in (23) the dative c-commands the accusative. The different binding
potentials of the two dative complements may in fact reflect a difference in their
theta roles: the dative complement of megmutat ‘show’ may be an experiencer,
and that of bemutat ‘introduce’ may be a goal. (Notice that the English equivalent
of the dative complement in (23) can also be realized as an indirect object, whereas
the English equivalent of the dative complement in (22) can only be realized as a
PP. Should the possibility or impossibility of dative shift in English turn out to be
thematically motivated, the English facts would also support our explanation of
the distribution of grammaticality (22)–(23).)
What (22)–(23) clearly indicate is that the licensing condition of anaphoric
relations cannot be morphological case. This conclusion is also confirmed by

The minimal predicate

37

the examination of causatives. In the case of a causative verb derived by the suffix
-tat/tet, the causee is in the instrumental case, and – despite the fact that a constituent
bearing an instrumental case and functioning as an instrument is less prominent
than an accusative object (24a,b) – the instrumental causee can bind the object,
and cannot be bound by it:
(27) a.

Jánossal és Marival felhı́vattam
egymást.
John-with and Mary-with call-CAUS-PAST-1SG each-other-ACC
‘I had John and Mary call each other.’

b. * Jánost és Marit
felhı́vattam
egymással.
John-ACC and Mary-ACC call-CAUS-PAST-1SG each-other-with
‘I had each other call John and Mary.’

Although the instrumental in (27a) may very well function as a subject at some
level of representation, the licensing condition of anaphora, nevertheless, cannot
be based on grammatical functions, either. Whereas in the cases discussed so far
the subject can bind the object, and not vice versa, in the case of psych verbs taking
a theme subject and an experiencer object, the binding relation between the two
arguments is more felicitous if the object binds the subject; compare:
(28) a.

Jánost önmaga
aggasztja a legkevésbé.
John-ACC himself-NOM worries the least
‘Himself worries John the least.’

b. ? János önmagát
aggasztja a legkevésbé.
John himself-ACC worries the least
‘John worries himself the least.’
(29) a.

Jánost csak önmaga
érdekli.
John-ACC only himself-NOM interests
‘Only himself interests John.’

b. ? János csak önmagát
érdekli.
John only himself-ACC interests
‘John interests only himself.’

These examples confirm that the prominence relation licensing anaphora cannot
be determined either in terms of case, or in terms of surface grammatical functions
or surface c-command. What underlies anaphoric binding is obviously a thematic
argument hierarchy: the binder must be thematically more prominent than the
anaphor.3 In (28)–(29) the object can bind the subject because it has an experiencer role, and an experiencer is thematically more prominent than a theme. The
3

The idea that binding is thematically constrained is not new; see, for example, Williams
(1987).

38

The syntax of Hungarian

(b) examples, in which the subject binds the object, are acceptable only to the
extent the verb can also be associated with an agentive meaning, with the subject
functioning as an agent, and the object functioning as a theme.
The crucial question is, of course, what place to attribute to the thematic argument hierarchy underlying anaphora in grammar; whether to encode it in a
structural hierarchy of arguments in a VP containing multiple shells, or to encode
it in the ordering of arguments in the theta-grid associated with a head in the lexicon, or perhaps simply to assume a hierarchy of the following type as a primitive
of grammar:
(30)

Thematic argument hierarchy
agent/experiencer > theme

>

goal >

instrumental

>

locative

If we adopt the hierarchical VP approach, then we have to assign to (28a) a VP
involving two VP-shells:
vP

(31)

v'

DP
önmagai
v

VP

aggasztjaj
V'

DP
Jánost

himself

worries

John-ACC

V

DP

tj

ti

The anaphor in subject position is licensed by the fact that the object c-commands
the root of the subject chain. It remains a question, however, what motivates the
movement of the object of VP into the subject position of vP.
If we assume a lexically encoded thematic argument hierarchy, we can maintain
the flatness of the VP. Then the primacy condition of binding will have to state
that a can bind b if it both c-commands b or its trace, and precedes b in the
thematic argument hierarchy. The notion of thematic prominence, however, must
also be interpreted on relations between non-coarguments. The following types of
antecedent–anaphor relations must be accounted for:

The minimal predicate
(32) a.

39

Karácsonyra ajándékot küldött János
és Mari
egymás
Christmas-on present-ACC sent John-NOM and Mary-NOM each.other’s
szüleinek.
parents-DAT
‘John and Mary sent presents to each other’s parents for Christmas.’

b. ? Karácsonyra ajándékot küldött egymás szüleinek János és Mari.
c. ?? Karácsonyra ajándékot küldtek Jánosnak és Marinak egymás
Christmas-on present-ACC sent
John-DAT and Mary-DAT each.other’s
szülei.
parents-NOM
‘To John and Mary, each other’s parents sent presents for Christmas.’
d. * Karácsonyra ajándékot küldtek egymás szülei Jánosnak és Marinak.

The facts that the subject can freely bind a subconstituent of the thematically less
prominent object, but the object cannot, or only marginally can, bind a subconstituent of the thematically more prominent subject suggest that an argument has
indirect thematic prominence also over the descendants of its thematically less
prominent coarguments. Interaction with linear precedence seems to be stronger
than in other cases: the lack of indirect thematic prominence can be compensated
for by linear precedence.4
The data in (32) suggest the following generalization:
(33)

The primacy condition of binding
a can bind b if it c-commands b or its trace, and at least (i) or (ii) holds:
i. a precedes b in the thematic argument hierarchy;
ii. a precedes b in linear order.

(34)

Thematic precedence
a precedes b in the thematic argument hierarchy if a is ordered prior to b or to
the constituent containing b in the thematic argument hierarchy.

While condition (33) correctly accounts for anaphoric relations between noncoarguments, it does not rule out constructions like (35), which are ungrammatical
despite the fact that the binding relation satisfies both the c-command and the
precedence conditions.
(35)

* A lányokban bı́znak önmaguk.
the girls-INESSIVE trust themselves-NOM
‘Themselves trust in the girls.’

The ungrammaticality of (35) may follow from the assumption that binding is an
asymmetric relation, which entails the following constraint:
4

For further data and discussion, see Kenesei (1989) and É. Kiss (1991b, 1994b).

40

The syntax of Hungarian

(36)

The asymmetry of binding
If a can bind b, b cannot bind a.

In (35) the possibility of the agent binding the theme excludes the possibility of the
theme binding the agent. (In (28)–(29) the different binding possibilities among
the same sets of complements are associated with different theta-grids, hence (36)
does not apply.) The asymmetry constraint is not relevant in cases like (32c), either,
as the genitive specifier is not a potential binder of the dative argument.

3.4.3

Evidence from Weak Crossover

In English and similar languages, the asymmetric subject–object relation
is also manifest in the asymmetry of the so-called Weak Crossover phenomenon.
Namely, a subject operator can bind the pronominal genitive of the object; however,
an object operator cannot bind the pronominal genitive of the subject:
(37) a. Whoi didn’t ti visit hisi mother?
b. ?* Whomi didn’t hisi mother visit ti ?

The most widely accepted explanation of the ungrammaticality of (37b) is that
it contains a wh-operator which binds two variables, in violation of the bijection
principle, that is:
(38)

for which x, x’s mother did not visit x

In the case of (37a) this problem does not arise: the pronoun is argument-bound
by the operator trace, hence the operator only has to bind a single variable:
(39)

for which x, x did not visit x’s mother

In Hungarian the equivalents of both (37a) and (37b) allow the bound variable
interpretation of the pronoun (represented by a pro licensed by an agreement
morpheme on the possessed noun):
(40) a.

b.

Kii látogatta meg az proi anyját?
who visited VM the pro’s mother-ACC
‘Who visited his mother?’
Kiti látogatott meg az proi anyja?
whom visited VM the pro’s mother-NOM
‘Who did his mother visit?’

The formula in (38), from which the English Weak Crossover effect is derived,
involves a subject in Spec,IP; however, the fact that the position of the subject is
external to the VP is immaterial; what is crucial is that it should asymmetrically
c-command the object. That is, if the explanation of the Weak Crossover effect

The minimal predicate

41

in terms of the bijection principle is correct, it should also hold in the case of
a VP-internal subject–object asymmetry. The lack of any Weak Crossover effect
in the Hungarian (40b) means that in the Hungarian VP not only can the subject
bind the genitive specifier of the object, but also the object can bind the genitive
specifier of the subject, i.e., the subject and the object mutually c-command each
other in a flat VP.5
In some approaches the Weak Crossover effect is derived from the Leftness
Condition, which says that a variable cannot be the antecedent of a pronoun on
its left (see Chomsky 1976). The Leftness Condition, too, will predict the lack
of Weak Crossover effects in Hungarian only if it is interpreted on a partially
ordered flat VP, in which the pronoun can be generated on the right of the variable
coindexed with it, as in structure (41):
(41)

Kiti látogatott meg ti az proi anyja?
whom visited VM the pro’s mother-NOM
‘Whom did his mother visit?’

Although the core cases are symmetric, the Weak Crossover phenomenon is in fact
not completely exempt from asymmetric effects in Hungarian, either; compare:
(42) a.

Minden diáki
meglátogatta az proi anyját.
every student-NOM visited
his
mother-ACC
‘Every student visited his mother.’

b.

Az proi anyját minden diáki meglátogatta.

c.

Minden diákoti
meglátogatott az proi anyja.
every student-ACC visited
his
mother-NOM
‘His mother visited every student.’

d. ?? Az proi anyja minden diákoti meglátogatott.
(43) a.

b.

5

Mindegyik lányi felismerte azt a férfit, aki benyitott a proi szobájába.
every
girl recognized that the man who opened her room-into
‘Every girl recognized the man who opened the door into her room.’
Azt a férfit, aki benyitott a proi szobájába, mindegyik lányi felismerte.

Bródy (1995) attempts to account for the lack of the Weak Crossover effect in (40b) in
the framework of a hierarchical VP. He claims that in (40b) it is not the trace of the
wh-object that argument-binds the genitive specifier of the subject. The wh-object raised
to Spec,FP has passed through Spec,AgrOP, and the pronominal genitive of the subject is
argument-bound by the intermediate trace in Spec,AgrOP. This proposal is problematic
because Hungarian displays no visible object movement to Spec,AgrOP any more than
English does. If both languages display LF movement (i.e., merely feature movement)
to Spec,AgrOP, then it is not clear what the source of the difference between the two
languages is.

42

The syntax of Hungarian
c.

Mindegyik lányti felismerte az a férfi, aki benyitott a proi szobájába.
every
girl-ACC recognized that the man who opened her room-into
‘The man who opened the door into her room recognized every girl.’

d. * Az a férfi, aki benyitott a proi szobájába, mindegyik lányti felismerte.

These examples display the same interrelation of thematic precedence, linear
precedence, and grammaticality as was observed in the case of anaphoric binding
between non-coarguments: the operator can bind the pronominal if it precedes
the pronominal either in the thematic argument hierarchy, or in linear order, or
both. If neither thematic, nor linear precedence is satisfied, binding is impossible. That is, the data attested follow from the primacy condition of binding
in (33).
Notice that the grammaticality difference between (42c) and (42d), or between
(43c) and (43d), is not any easier to account for in the framework of the hierarchical
VP approach. If the operator is required to c-command the pronominal from its base
position, then the grammatical (42c) and (43c) are predicted to be ungrammatical.
If the c-command condition is allowed to be satisfied by a higher link of the
operator chain as well, then the ungrammatical (42d) and (43d) are not ruled out.
Furthermore, we also lose the explanation of the Weak Crossover effect in terms
of the bijection principle.

3.4.4

Weighing the evidence

Binding and Weak Crossover phenomena in Hungarian display a controversial array of subject–object symmetries and asymmetries. We attest a subject–
object symmetry in the case of disjoint reference between a referring expression and a c-commanding pronoun, and in the case of the core cases of Weak
Crossover. Anaphora, disjoint reference between two referring expressions, and a
subset of Weak Crossover cases provide evidence for a hierarchy of arguments.
This argument hierarchy is not identical with the c-command hierarchy of grammatical functions in an articulated VP, but is thematically determined. In the case
of certain psych verbs, for example, the object of experiencer role can bind the
subject of theme role. It remains an open question if the argument hierarchy attested should be represented structurally in a VP containing multiple shells, or if
it should be represented for example in the form of an ordered theta-grid in the
lexicon.6

6

For a further argument supporting a binary branching VP, see Bánréti (1994: 379).

The minimal predicate

43

A flat VP would, naturally, represent a problem for theories stipulating that all
linguistic structures are binary branching. Kayne’s theory of antisymmetry (1994)
licenses only binary branching phrases composed of a head and a phrase because
only the asymmetric c-command instantiated by such structures can impose a linear
ordering of terminal elements. It is not inconceivable, however, that in a somewhat
relaxed version of this theory the lack of asymmetry might result in a partially
linearized structure of the type represented by the Hungarian VP, in which the
head, asymmetrically c-commanding its complements, occupies initial position;
the post-head arguments, mutually c-commanding each other, on the other hand,
can stand in a random order.

3.5

Morphosyntactic projections7

3.5.1

Modality, tense, mood

Hungarian is an agglutinative language, i.e., the tense, mood, person,
etc. morphemes appear as suffixes on the verb. These morphemes, nevertheless,
are independent syntactic constituents: they either enter into agreement relations
with major constituents of the VP, or act as operators taking scope over the VP.
Therefore, they will be represented as heads of functional projections extending
the VP.
The Hungarian verb can combine with the following types of inflectional
morphemes:
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
7

modality (Mod) suffix: -hat/het ‘may’, expressing either epistemic or
deontic modality;8
tense (T) suffix: -t/tt, expressing past tense; null suffix, expressing present
tense;
mood (M) suffix: -na/ne, expressing conditional; - j, expressing imperative/subjunctive;
object agreement (AgrO) suffix: -ja/i, agreeing with the definiteness feature of the object;
subject agreement (AgrS) suffix: a full paradigm, agreeing with the number and person of the subject.

This section is based mainly on Bartos (1999a), but also incorporates ideas of den Dikken
(1999b). For discussions of verb–object agreement, see also Farkas (1987, 1990).
8
Bartos (1999a) refutes the traditional view that -hat/het is a derivational suffix on the basis
of two arguments. First, unlike derivational suffixes, -hat/het can be freely added to any
verb stem, which is typical of inflectional suffixes. Second, it has sentential scope.

44

The syntax of Hungarian

These morphemes appear affixed to the verb in the order:
V + modality + tense + mood + object agreement + subject agreement.

In observance of the mirror principle of Baker (1985), according to which morphological derivation is the mirror image of syntactic derivation, Bartos (1999a)
assigns to the verb phrase the following syntactic projection:
AgrSP

(44)
AgrS

AgrOP
MoodP

AgrO

TenseP

Mood

ModP

Tense
Mod

VP
…

V

To obtain the morphophonological output of such morphosyntactic trees, we have
to reverse the order of heads; for example:
(45) a.

AgrSP

AgrOP

AgrO

MoodP

Mood

TenseP
Tense

ModP

VP

Mod
V
-tok

-á-

-t-

-hat-

lát-

…
M

AgrS

lát-hat-t-á-tok ‘(you) could see’

The minimal predicate

45

AgrSP
AgrS

AgrOP
AgrO

MP
M

TP
T

ModP
VP

Mod
V
-k

-é-

-n-

-het- néz-

…
M

b.

néz-het-n-é-k ‘(I) would be able to watch’

The morphosyntactic unit constituted by the verb and the inflectional suffixes
attached to it can be straightforwardly derived by cyclic head movement. This is
not so, however, in the case of inflected nominals, where head movement would
leave intermediate specifiers stranded incorrectly behind the raised nominal; see
Chapter 7. Therefore, Bartos (1999a) has proposed an alternative mechanism: he
has introduced the operation of morphosyntactic merger.
(46)

Morphosyntactic merger
Two structurally subjacent categories can merge into a unit constituting a single
word domain if thereby one of them satisfies its morphological need (e.g. if an
affix satisfies its need for a stem).

(47)

Structural subjacency
X and Y are structurally subjacent if and only if
a. X c-commands Y, and
b. there is no Z (of the same projection level as X) such that X c-commands Z
and Z c-commands Y.

Morphosyntactic merger takes place in the course of syntactic derivation. It forms
a chain from the participating categories, without involving movement. Its output
is a morpheme complex within which the relative order of elements is determined
by their properties; for example, a morpheme marked as [+suffix] is cliticized to
the right edge of the stem. The morpheme complex is pronounced in the position
of the stem.
Bartos (1999a) derives the inflected verb form as follows: the verb is raised to
the lowest functional head (in the above cases: to Mod(ality)) to check its [+finite]
feature – but it combines with the rest of the inflectional morphemes via

46

The syntax of Hungarian

morphosyntactic merger. Consequently, it is pronounced in the position of its
lowest inflectional ending, with all endings adjoined to its right.
The past conditional verb does not quite fit into the structure represented under (44). It is a synthetic verb form consisting of a finite past-tense lexical verb
and an invariant expletive verb bearing the conditional suffix. Bartos (1999a) proposes the following analysis of this verb form: A verb in the past conditional
is to be merged with a phonologically salient tense (T) morpheme and a mood
(M) morpheme. The resulting [word V + T + M] unit constructed in syntax violates a morphophonological constraint, which rules out words containing two
subsequent analytic suffixes in their inflectional domain (compare Rebrus 2000).9
Consequently, the morphophonological component does not accept the V + T +
M form, and a repair strategy is triggered. What happens is that a dummy stem
(that of the copula) is inserted to pick up the M suffix; that is:
AgrSP

(48)

AgrS

MP
M
Vexpl

TP
T

M

VP

Vi

T

-em

vol-

-na

néz-

-t-

1SG

be

COND

watch

PAST

ti …

Interestingly, the singular 1st person agreement suffix (-em) combines with néz-t
instead of vol-na, i.e., of the two available verb forms the farther one is raised to
AgrS. Bartos claims that this is the more economical solution, despite appearances.
Namely, if nominative case is assigned or checked by tense, and if the locus of
nominative assignment/checking is the Spec,AgrSP position – as is assumed in the
Minimalist framework – then T (already merged with V) has to be raised to AgrS
anyway, for an independent reason. V + T movement to AgrS yields the following
complex verb form:
9

A -hat/het + Tense combination does not violate the constraint blocking two subsequent
analytic inflectional suffixes because -hat/het, although morphosyntactically an inflectional suffix, is categorized from a morphophonological point of view as a derivational
suffix.

The minimal predicate
(49)

47

AgrSP
MP

AgrS
[Vi + T]j + AgrS
M
Vexpl M

TP
T

VP

V
néz- -t-

-em vol- -na

tj

ti

‘(I) would have watched’

In Hungarian the scope principle, according to which operators have scope over
the domain they c-command, is generally observed in visible syntax. Finite verb
forms containing a modality suffix and a tense suffix, or a tense suffix and a mood
suffix, nevertheless, appear to violate this generalization: they are ambiguous with
respect to the relative scope of the two suffixes. For example, in vár-hat-t-ak ‘waitMod-T-AgrS’ either tense can have scope over modality (50a), or modality can
have scope over tense (50b).
(50) a.

b.

Az elı́téltek csak az udvaron
vár-hat-t-ak
a
látogatóikra.
the convicts only the courtyard-in wait-MOD-PAST-3PL their visitors-for
‘The convicts could wait for their visitors only in the courtyard.’
T > Mod: [T were [Mod allowed to wait. . .]]
A vendégek talán a túlsó
megállóban vár-hat-t-ak,
ezért
the guests
perhaps the opposite bus-stop-in wait-MOD-PAST-3PL therefore
kerültük el egymást.
missed-we VM each.other
‘The guests could have been waiting at the opposite bus-stop, that was why we
missed each other.’
Mod > T: [Mod could [T have been waiting. . .]]

V + T + M combinations, e.g. vártak volna ‘wait-T-AgrS Expl-M’ are also ambiguous scopally. The context facilitates a M > T interpretation in (51a) and a
T > M reading in (51b):
(51) a.

Az őrök vár-t-ak
vol-na,
ha szóltál
volna
nekik.
the guards wait-PAST-3PL EXPL-COND if called-you EXPL-COND them
‘The guards would have waited if you had asked them to.’
M > T: [M would [T have waited. . .]]

48

The syntax of Hungarian
b.

A vendégek szı́vesen vár-t-ak
vol-na
tovább, de már
nem
the guests
gladly wait-PAST-3PL EXPL-COND longer but already not
lehetett.
was.possible
‘The guests would gladly have waited longer, but it was impossible.’
T > M: [T it was the case that [M they would wait]]

Interestingly, verb forms containing both a Mod(ality) and a M(ood) morpheme
are never ambiguous scopally; the scope order of the suffixes strictly corresponds
to their order of c-command; for example, vár-hat-ná-nak ‘wait-Mod-M-AgrS’
can only mean [M would [Mod be possible (for them) to wait]]. That is, a modality
suffix with scope over tense is licensed by an empty mood head, and a mood suffix
with scope under tense is licensed by an empty modality head. These facts suggest
that, if only one of the Mod and M positions is filled, then a chain can be formed
between the two slots across tense. According to Bartos (1999a; 2000c), a modality
suffix can acquire scope over tense (as happens in (50b)) in the following way: the
MP projection is generated empty, as a proxy, with no feature specification, and
the V + Mod complex can be substituted into its head position, lending its feature
specification to it – as represented in (52). In the resulting chain the modality suffix
c-commands tense, and takes scope over it:
(52)

[#P # [TP T [ModP [Mod V + Mod]. . .]]] → [ModP [Mod V + Mod] [TP T [ModP t. . .]]]

In the case of (51b), the situation is somewhat different. Mood in the scope of
tense is associated with a particular modal meaning, expressing intention. Bartos
(1999a; 2000c) claims that this meaning cannot be expressed by a single morpheme
in Hungarian; instead, it is associated with a mood–modality chain, which is like
an expletive–associate chain, with the mood morpheme serving as the expletive
element, and the empty modality morpheme serving as the contentive associate.
As in expletive–associate chains in general, scope is determined by the contentive
element, which is in the c-command domain and scope of tense;10 that is:
(53)

MP
Mi

TP
T

ModP
Modi

V
10

VP
Modi

For further technical details, see Bartos (1999a, 2000c).

The minimal predicate

3.5.2

49

Object agreement and subject agreement

The Hungarian verb is informally said to have an objective conjugation, used in the presence of a definite object, and a subjective conjugation, used
elsewhere.11 A closer look at the morphophonological structure of the suffixes in
the objective paradigm reveals, however, that they represent the combination, or
sometimes the fusion, of a -(j)a/j(a) (in the case of a front vowel stem: an -i) suffix
and a subject agreement marker (see Rebrus 2000); compare:
(54) a. én ı́r-o-m a könyvet ‘I write the book’ b. én ı́r-ok (egy könyvet) ‘I write (a book)’
te ı́r-o-d
te ı́r-sz
ő ı́r-ja-0
ő ı́r-0
mi ı́r-j-uk
mi ı́r-unk
ti ı́r-já-tok
ti ı́r-tok
ők ı́r-já-k
ők ı́r-nak

Since the two constituents of the suffixes in the objective paradigm clearly play
independent syntactic roles, they have to be analyzed as distinct functional heads.
The -j(a)/(j)a element represents the head of an object agreement phrase (AgrOP)
dominating MP, and the outermost morpheme represents the head of a subject
agreement phrase (AgrSP) dominating AgrOP.
As Bartos (1999a) demonstrated, AgrOP – i.e., the locus of agreement between
a verb and its object – cannot also be the locus of accusative assignment or checking. This conclusion is based on an argument other than the fact that accusative
assignment is not linked to an invariant Spec,AgrOP position. Bartos’s point is that
infinitives do not have an object agreement suffix – still, they assign accusative
case to their object; for example:
(55) a.

b.

Nem szép dolog becsapni valakit.
not nice thing to.deceive someone-ACC
‘It is not a nice thing to deceive someone.’
Jöttünk meglátogatni Pétert.
came-we to.visit
Peter-ACC
‘We have come to visit Peter.’

In modal/temporal auxiliary + transitive infinitive constructions, different heads
participate in object agreement and accusative assignment: the object agreement
morpheme appears on the finite verb, whereas the source of the accusative case is
the infinitival V; compare:
11

By definite object I mean an object of the category DP. NumP and NP objects trigger the
subjective conjugation. The problem of the syntactic category of noun phrases, and its
interaction with the subjective/objective conjugation are discussed in Chapter 7.

50

The syntax of Hungarian

(56) a.

Mikor akar-já-tok meghı́vni Jánost?
when want-DEF-2PL to.invite John-ACC
‘When do you want to invite John?’

b.

Mikor akar-tok meghı́vni néhány kollégát?
when want-2PL to.invite some colleague-ACC
‘When do you want to invite some colleagues?’

In (56a) the [+definite object] feature of the AgrO suffix on the finite verb agrees
with the [+definite object] feature of the object of the infinitive.
Only transitive verbs agree with the object of their infinitive. The intransitive
verb of the following examples – taking an infinitive with a definite object in
(57a), and an infinitive with an indefinite object in (57b) – does not combine with
an object agreement suffix in either case:
(57) a.

b.

Igyekszünk
meglátogatni Pétert
make.effort-1PL to.visit
Peter-ACC
‘We make efforts to visit Peter.’
Igyekszünk
meglátogatni néhány kollégát.
make.effort-1PL to.visit
some colleague-ACC
‘We make efforts to visit some colleagues.’

Den Dikken (1999b) interprets these data differently. He claims that the semiauxiliary-like finite verbs agreeing with the object of their infinitive participate in
clause union, that is, the AgrO projection which checks both the definiteness and
the Case of the embedded object is located in the matrix functional domain. The
verbs in (55) and (57) are incapable of clause union, hence the AgrO head checking
the definiteness and Case of the object of the infinitive must be downstairs in the
infinitival domain, represented by a phonologically null element.
In the theory of Bartos, the definite AgrO morpheme has no null allomorph.
Hence, (55a) and (57a) are regarded by him as evidence indicating that nonfinite verbs taking a definite object combine with no AgrO. Only finite transitive
verbs agree with their object, i.e., only finite transitive verbs project an AgrOP.
Naturally, if finite transitive verbs need to agree with their object – or, in Minimalist
terminology, if finite transitive verbs have an object feature to check – then they
must also agree with their indefinite object. That is, a finite verb having a [–definite]
object must also bear a phonologically null agreement suffix.
In Bartos’s theory finite transitive verbs must find an object noun phrase to agree
with in the minimal finite clause containing them. In (58) the finite verb has only
the object of its infinitival complement at its disposal:
(58)

[AgrSP -tok [AgrO -já- [VP akar- [Inf P -ni [VP lát- [DP Pétert ]]]]]] →
-3PL
-DEF want-INF see- Peter-ACC
akar-já-tok lát-ni Pétert
‘(you) want to see Peter’

The minimal predicate

51

Pétert receives accusative case from lát, its V head. Akar, being a finite transitive
verb, projects an AgrOP, and looks for an object so as to have its [+/–definite
object] feature checked. The closest object it finds is the definite Pétert, hence
AgrO will be realized as -ja-. If the object of lát were an indefinite NumP (e.g.
néhány kollégát), AgrO would be represented by a phonologically empty suffix.
The object does not move to Spec,AgrOP in visible syntax; only its definiteness
feature is raised there in Logical Form (LF).
Den Dikken (1999b) has been led to the conclusion that object movement to
Spec,AgrOP cannot take place in visible syntax by the following set of examples:
(59) a.

b.

Hagyok [takarı́tani a szobámban]
let-I
to.clean my room-in
‘I let my room be cleaned.’
Hagyom [Jánosnak dicsérni Marit]
let-I
John-DAT to.praise Mary-ACC
‘I let John praise Mary.’

c. * Hagylak [Jánosnak dicsérni téged]
let-I
John-DAT to.praise you-ACC
‘I let John praise you.’
d.

Hagylak [dicsérni téged]
let-I
to.praise you-ACC
‘I let you be praised.’

These sentences involve a permissive construction. In (59b) and (59c) the dative
permissee is also spelled out. In (59a) the matrix verb bears default indefinite object
agreement – because its object, an infinitive phrase, does not count as definite.
Hence, the definite object agreement suffix appearing on the verb in (59b) must be
triggered by the definite object of the infinitive. In (59c–d) the matrix verb bears the
-lak/lek object agreement suffix appearing in the presence of a 1st person subject
and a 2nd person object. Den Dikken (1999b) argues that its -l- element is an object
clitic undergoing clitic movement (an issue to be discussed more in detail below).
The ungrammaticality of (59c) indicates that clitic movement is blocked by an
intervening permissee, which presumably occupies an A-position, preventing Amovement across it into the matrix Spec,AgrOP – as predicted by the Relativized
Minimality condition. Since agreement with a 3rd person object is not blocked by
the permissee (59b), it cannot involve A-movement; the object of the infinitive must
check the definiteness feature of the matrix AgrO suffix via feature movement.
Bartos’s theory of verb–object agreement faces a problem. It relies on the assumption that a verb must agree with the closest object. This assumption is needed
to account for example for ECM constructions like (60), in which the finite verb
must agree with the definite matrix object instead of the indefinite object of the
infinitive:

52

The syntax of Hungarian

(60)

Nem hagy-t-uk
/*hagy-t-0-unk
a gyerekeket leckét
ı́rni.
not let-PAST-DEF.1PL / let-PAST-INDEF-1PL the children-ACC lesson-ACC write
‘We didn’t let the children do homework.’

In the framework outlined by Bartos, an infinitive phrase is presumably also a
potential object for a finite transitive verb to agree with – or else the [+/–definite
object] feature of the object agreement suffix of finite transitive verbs like akar
‘want’ in constructions like akarok úszni ‘I want to swim’ remains unchecked. An
infinitive phrase counts as an indefinite object, triggering a null AgrO suffix on the
finite verb. The problem is how to ensure that, as long as there is a definite noun
phrase inside the infinitive phrase, the verb agrees with the object of the infinitive
rather than the infinitive phrase itself – while maintaining that it agrees with the
closest object available.
That-clauses represent less of a problem for Bartos’s approach. They are associated with a pronominal head in Hungarian, forming an appositive relation
with it – see Chapter 10. The propositional content and theta role of the object
are carried by the clause, whereas its categorial, case and definiteness features
are carried by the pronoun. Consequently, an object clause always counts as definite, and, accordingly, it triggers the objective conjugation of the matrix verb; for
example:
(61) a.

b.

János azt
akar-ja-0,
hogy meghı́vjuk Marit.
John it-ACC want-DEF-3SG that invite-we Mary-ACC
‘John wants that we invite Mary.’
János azt
akar-ja-0,
hogy meghı́vjunk valakit.
John it-ACC want-DEF-3SG that invite-we someone-ACC
‘John wants that we invite someone.’

If the pronominal head of a that-clause is absent, the that-clause is transparent
for long operator movement. Interestingly, when the object of an object clause
undergoes long operator movement and lands for example in the focus position of
the matrix clause, the matrix verb will agree with the extracted object:
(62) a.

János Marit
akar-ja-0,
hogy meghı́vjuk t.
John Mary-ACC want-DEF-3SG that invite-we
‘It is Mary that John wants that we should invite.’

b.

János kit
akar-0-0,
hogy meghı́vjunk t?
John whom want-INDEF-3SG that invite-we
‘Whom does John want that we should invite?’

What is more, when the subject of the object clause is extracted, it can be assigned
accusative case by the matrix verb, and the matrix verb will agree with this subjectturned-object:

The minimal predicate
(63) a.

János Pétert
akar-ja-0,
hogy vezesse az autóját.
John Peter-ACC want-DEF-3SG that drive his car
‘It is Peter that John wants to drive his car.’

b.

János kit
akar-0-0,
hogy vezesse az autóját?
John whom want-INDEF-3SG that drive his car
‘Whom does John want to drive his car?’

53

These facts can be interpreted as follows: the constituent extracted from the embedded clause moves first into the Spec,CP of the embedded sentence, which is
in the local domain of both the embedded verb and the matrix verb. If the subject,
which is caseless according to certain theories such as Bittner and Hale (1996),
is raised into Spec,CP, then it picks up the accusative case that the matrix verb
assigns to its CP object. This is what happened to Pétert and kit in (63a,b); and this
is also what happens in the British English Whomi do you suggest [CP ti [IP ti should
be the chairman]]. The extracted element first participates in subject agreement
in the embedded clause, and then, upon being raised into the matrix domain, and
receiving accusative case there, it participates in object agreement in the matrix
clause.
In addition to the objective and subjective paradigms, there is also an isolated
verb form used in the presence of a 1st person singular subject and a 2nd person
object:
(64) a.

b.

(Én) lát-lak
(téged).
I see-2.1SG you-ACC
‘I see you.’
(Én) hal-lak
benneteket.
I hear-2.1SG you.PL-ACC
‘I hear you.’

In the presence of a 3rd person subject or a 1st person plural subject, a 2nd person
object triggers the indefinite conjugation, i.e., it counts as a noun phrase of the
category NumP (see Chapter 7, and Bartos 1997), agreeing with a null object
marker on the V;12 compare:
12

It is not clear why 1st and 2nd person objects count as indefinite NumPs, unlike 3rd
person objects, which act as definite DPs. Den Dikken (1999b; 2000) has put forth an
interesting, morphologically based explanation. He points out that in 1st and 2nd person
accusative pronouns the pronominal stem is supplied with a 1st or 2nd person possessive
agreement suffix, as follows:
en(g)-em
I-POSS.1SG
‘me’

mi-nk-et
we-POSS.1PL-ACC
‘us’
(continued overleaf )

54

The syntax of Hungarian

(65) a.

Lát-já-k
Jánost/őt.
see-DEF-3PL John-ACC/him
‘They see John/him.’

b.

Lát-0-nak téged/engem.
see-INDEF-3PL you/me
‘They see you/me.’

Accordingly, -lak does not include the -ja object agreement morpheme. It can be
decomposed into a -k 1st person singular agreement marker, and an -l 2nd person
agreement marker instead. In infinitival constructions in which the infinitive has
a 2nd person object, -lak/lek can also combine with the finite verb when it is
intransitive. That is, whereas in (66a) the intransitive finite verb does not tolerate a
-ja/i object agreement suffix despite the presence of a definite object in the infinitive
phrase, in (66c) it accepts a -lak/lek licensed by the 2nd person object:
(66) a. * A lányok igyekez-i-k
meglátogatni Jánost.
the girls make.effort-DEF-3PL to.visit
John-ACC
‘The girls make an effort to visit John.’
compare:
b.

A lányok igyekez-0-nek
meglátogatni Jánost.
the girls make.effort-INDEF-3PL to.visit
John-ACC

c.

Igyekez-lek
meglátogatni (téged).
make.effort-2.1SG to.visit
you
‘I make effort to visit you.’

A further peculiarity of -lak/lek, noticed by den Dikken (1999b), is that in the case
of object extraction it cannot appear both in the source clause and in the target
clause (68), although 3rd person objects trigger agreement in both cycles (67).
(67) a.

b.

János ÉVÁT
mond-t-a-0,
hogy meghı́v-ja-0.
John Eve-ACC say-PAST-DEF-3SG that invite-DEF-3SG
‘It was Eve that John said that he would invite.’
Kit mond-ott-0-0
János, hogy meghı́v-0-0?
whom say-PAST-INDEF-3SG John that invite-INDEF-3SG
‘Whom did John say that he would invite?’
té(g)-ed
you-POSS.2SG
‘you-ACC’

ti-tek-et
you-POSS.2PL-ACC
‘you-ACC’

Den Dikken claims that these pronominal elements form a possessive construction with
an invisible clitic pronoun, i.e., a kind of clitic-doubling takes place. Clitic-doubling constructions have been argued to represent expletive–associate relations. In an expletive–
associate chain the associate cannot be definite; hence, when it is coindexed with a
definite argument the carrier of the definiteness feature is the expletive (i.e., in the case
under discussion, the invisible clitic).

The minimal predicate
(68) a.

b.

55

Azt szeret-né-m
a legjobban, ha megismer-het-né-lek téged.
it-ACC like-COND-DEF.1SG the best
if learn-MOD-COND-2.1SG you-ACC
‘I would like the best if I could get to know you.’
Tégedi szeretné-m a legjobban, ha megismerhetné-lek ti .
‘It is you that I would like the best if I could get to know.’

c. * Téged szeretné-lek a legjobban, ha megismerhetné-lek.
d. * Téged szeretné-lek a legjobban, ha megismerhetné-k.
but:
e.

Téged szeretné-lek
a legjobban megismerni.
you-ACC like-COND-DEF.1SG the best
to.learn
‘It is you that I would like the best to get to know.’

Den Dikken (1999b) concludes on the basis of these facts that the -l- element
of -lak/lek is, in fact, an object clitic pronoun cliticized to the subject agreement
marker, and the constructions in which it occurs involve clitic-doubling. A clitic,
unlike an agreement marker, cannot be iterated – that is why (68c) is ruled out.
Example (68d) is ungrammatical – as opposed to (68e) – because clitic movement
cannot transgress a finite clause boundary.
Subject agreement involves fewer descriptive problems. The subject agreement
marker appears as the outmost inflectional suffix on the verb, hence it is placed
in the head position of the highest morphosyntactic projection subsuming the VP.
The number and person features of the agreement morpheme have to match those
of the subject. In view of the claim that AgrO does not participate in accusative
assignment, it is questionable whether Spec,AgrSP plays a role in nominative assignment/checking. Certain facts of Hungarian suggest a link only between nominative assignment/checking and TenseP. Thus, although a type of infinitive can
bear an AgrS marker in Hungarian (see Section 9.4), it cannot have a nominative
subject. The adverbial participial phrases -ván/vén – the only type of non-finite
verb projections that allow a nominative subject – appear to have a tense projection,
but no AgrSP (see Section 9.5). So, let us conclude tentatively that the nominative
case of the subject is checked in Spec,TenseP – but only invisibly, at LF, without
the phonological content of the subject also moving up there.

3.6

The verbal preﬁx

3.6.1

Its category and structural position

Verbs very often have a particle-like adverbial complement (in traditional
Hungarian linguistic terminology: a verbal prefix), which is not only categorially
selected, but is also lexically identified. The verbal prefix represents a notoriously

56

The syntax of Hungarian

difficult problem of describing Hungarian syntax. Native speakers’ intuition is that
it forms a compound with the verb selecting it. This intuition, which is reflected in
traditional Hungarian grammars, and is also expressed by the spelling convention
which requires the prefix + verb unit to be spelled as one word, is based on the
following facts. First, prefix + verb combinations are listed in the lexicon as lexical
units; for example:
(69)

olvas ‘read’
elolvas ‘read, finish reading’
átolvas ‘read through, skim’
felolvas ‘read aloud’
megolvas ‘count (money)
beolvas ‘tell off’
ráolvas ‘heal by words’
etc.

These prefix + verb combinations differ not only in their meaning, but also in
their argument structures. Thus, olvas and felolvas can be transitive or intransitive;
elolvas, átolvas, megolvas are obligatorily transitive, beolvas takes a dative argument, whereas ráolvas takes an object bearing a sublative case. The meaning of the
prefix + verb combination can also be completely non-compositional – e.g. be-rúg
literally ‘in-kick’ means ‘get drunk’. It also supports the compound analysis that
in sentences containing no logical operator the verbal prefix immediately precedes
the verb, and forms a phonological word with it:
(70)

János fel olvasta a verseit.
John up read his poems
‘John read out his poems.’

If prefix + verb combinations were treated as compounds, these facts could easily
be derived. At the same time, however, phrases may also share these properties.
For example, elements of a phrasal idiom also form a single lexical unit. The
subcategorization properties of the idiom can be different from those of the base
verb, and the idiom can also be semantically non-compositional. The phonological
evidence is not decisive, either: a verb following a prefix loses its stress to the same
extent as a verb following a focus constituent does; still, the ‘focus + verb’ string is
clearly not a compound. At the same time, the verbal prefix has syntactic properties
which are only characteristic of independent syntactic units. Thus, in the presence
of a focus or a negative particle the prefix stays behind the verb, and it need not
even be adjacent to it; compare:
(71) a.

János tegnap olvasta fel a verseit.
John yesterday read
up his poems
‘It was yesterday that John read out his poems.’

The minimal predicate
b.

57

Péter nem olvasta őket fel.
Peter not read
them up
‘Peter did not read them out.’

The prefix and the verb can also be separated by a particle:
(72)

János fel akarta olvasni a verseit, és fel is olvasta őket.
John up wanted to.read his poems and up also read
them
‘John wanted to read out his poems, and out he read them.’

The prefix can be raised into a position non-adjacent to the verb; e.g. it can undergo contrastive topicalization (73a). What is more, it can also be raised into a
superordinate clause (73b,c).
(73) a.

Fel csak János olvasta a verseit.
out only John read
his poems
‘Out loud, only John read his poems.’

b.

János fel szeretné olvasni a verseit.
John up would.like to.read his poems
‘John would like to read out his poems.’

c.

Fel akarom, hogy olvasd a
verseidet.
up I.want that you.read your poems
‘I want that you should read out your poems.’

These facts cannot be derived if the prefix + verb complex is inserted into the
syntactic structure as a compound with deleted inner brackets. Therefore, we have
no choice but to insert the prefix as an independent syntactic unit, a lexically
selected complement of the verb.
There are also further difficult questions to answer. Namely, should the prefix be
inserted in a postverbal argument position, or in a preverbal modifier position? And,
crucially, should it be analyzed as a phrase or as a head? Certain considerations
support the base-generation of the verbal prefix in postverbal argument position.
Namely, the prefix occupies the same preverbal position in (70), where it is selected
by the verb adjacent to it, as in (73b,c), where it has nothing to do lexically–
semantically with the verb immediately following it. According to the evidence
of (73b,c) the preverbal prefix position must be a derived position for the verbal
prefix, the landing site of prefix movement. Furthermore, as is argued in Section
3.6.3, the verbal prefix represents only a subtype of a larger functional class of verb
modifiers displaying similar syntactic properties. This larger class also includes
bare nominal complements, among them objects, oblique complements expressing
a goal, and non-agentive subjects; for example:
(74) a.

János újságot
olvas.
John newspaper-ACC reads
‘John is engaged in newspaper-reading.’

58

The syntax of Hungarian
b.

János iskolába ment.
John to.school went
‘John went to school.’

c.

Vı́z szivárog a falból.
water oozes the wall-from
‘Water is oozing from the wall.’

Although these types of verb modifiers do not refer to concrete participants of
the action denoted by the VP, they bear case, and seem to be associated with a
theta role. If theta-role assignment and (at least some cases of) case-assignment
presuppose a verb–argument relation, then the verb modifier must be generated in
postverbal position, among the arguments of the verb.
The subtype of verb modifiers called verbal prefix is constituted by a bare adverb,
but, since adverbs usually have no specifier or complement, it can, in principle,
also be analyzed as an AdvP consisting of a mere head. The crucial question is
whether it moves like a phrase, landing in a specifier position, or moves like a
head, landing in a position adjoined to another head. Head movement is local, so if
prefix movement were found to be non-local, it would be evidence of the phrasal
status of the prefix. In fact, long prefix movement is possible; modal and temporal
auxiliaries can attract a prefix not only across an infinitive phrase boundary but
also across a CP boundary:
(75) a.

13

János fel akarja olvasni a verseit.
John up wants read-INF his poems
‘John wants to read out his poems.’

b.

Jánosnak fel kell olvasnia
a verseit.
John-DAT up needs read-INF-3SG his poems
‘John needs to read out his poems.’

c.

János fel szeretném, hogy olvassa
a verseit.
John up I.would.like that read-SUBJ-3SG his poems
‘I would like that John read out his poems.’

d.

János fel kell, hogy olvassa
a verseit.13,14
John up needs that read-SUBJ-3SG his poems
‘It is necessary that John read out his poems.’

Long prefix movement sounds acceptable only if the section of the embedded clause
crossed by the raised prefix contains nothing but a complementizer – and perhaps a
topic. Compare the distribution of grammaticality in the following set of examples.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Fel kellene,
hogy olvasd a
verseidet.
up need-COND that you.read your poems
János fel kellene,
hogy olvassa a verseit.
John up need-COND that read his poems
? Fel kellene,
hogy János olvassa a verseit.
up need-COND that John read his poems
* Fel kellene,
hogy csak nekem olvassa János a verseit.
up need-COND that only to.me read John his poems
* Fel kellene,
hogy minden este olvassa János a verseit.
up need-COND that every night read John his poems

The minimal predicate

59

There are also further powerful arguments for the phrasal status of the prefix: it
can undergo topicalization and focussing, which are phrasal movement transformations:
(76) a.

b.

[TopP Fel [FP János olvasta a verseit]]
up
John read his poems
‘Loudly, JOHN read his poems.’
[TopP János [NegP nem [FP fel ment a lépcsőn]]], hanem le
ment.
John
not
up went the stairs
but
down went
‘It was not up the stairs but down that John went.’

The prefix can constitute an elliptic sentence in itself, which, again, is a phrasal
property; compare:
(77)

Fel olvasta János a verseit?
‘Did John read out his poems?’
Fel.
‘He did.’

Jakab (1998) claims that in such sentences the lower verb and the complementizer merge
into a single head, i.e., prefix movement is local, after all. However, sentences (c–e)
might be marginal or ungrammatical for a semantic reason. Namely, as is argued in Section 3.6.2., the verbal prefix functions as an aspectual operator, and moves to Spec,AspP
in order to assume scope over the VP. The focus in (d) and the quantifier in (e), on
the other hand, are propositional operators, which have scope over AspP. Long prefix
movement takes place when the matrix verb is an auxiliary-like modal forming a single
semantic domain together with the complement clause, i.e., when the scope of the aspect
marker also has to be extended over the matrix clause. The problem with (d,e) is that
the aspectual operator has scope over the matrix VP, whereas the focus and the universal
quantifier, which are propositional operators, only have scope over the embedded clause –
although propositional operators should have wider scope than AspP.
14
Den Dikken (1999b, footnote 28) calls attention to the fact that prefix movement across a
finite clause boundary – unlike local prefix movement – is never obligatory; furthermore,
it is only felicitous if the prefix has an independent semantic content. The prefix of a
semantically non-compositional prefix + verb complex can only marginally be extracted;
compare with (75c,d):
(i) ?* Be szeretném, ha olvasnál a főnöknek.
in I.would.like if you.read the boss-DAT
‘I would like it if you told off [scolded] the boss.’
(ii)

? Be kell, hogy olvassak neked.
in needs that I.read you-DAT
‘It is necessary that I tell you off [scold you].’

Den Dikken concludes on the basis of these facts and those discussed in footnote 13
that this type of long prefix movement is different from local prefix movement, or prefix
movement across an infinitival boundary: it is an A-bar movement.

60

The syntax of Hungarian

These facts appear to suggest that the verbal prefix is an AdvP consisting of a mere
head, base-generated in postverbal position among the complements of the V. A
preverbal prefix occupies the specifier position of a functional projection. That is,
the predicate phrase of for example (70) has the following structure:
XP

(78)

Spec

X'
VP

X
V

DP

fel

olvasta

a verseit

up

read

his poems

The correctness of structure (78) can be checked for example by testing if the VP
can pass the usual constituency tests; for instance, if it can be coordinated with
another VP. Surprisingly, it cannot:
(79) a.

János [fel [hı́vta Marit]] és [fel [olvasta neki a versét]] →
John up called Mary and up read her his poem

b. * János [fel [hı́vta Marit] és [olvasta neki a versét]]

Example (79b) is ungrammatical under the reading in which the two coordinated
VPs share the same fel suffix; it can only be accepted if the second verb is interpreted
prefixless. Its ungrammaticality can only be derived from a structure in which the
last two elements of the ‘prefix V object’ string do not form a constituent; i.e., if
the phrase is structured as follows:
(80)

XP
VP

X
VM

V

t

DP

If this is the right structure of the predicate of (70), then not only the ungrammaticality of (79) follows, but also the grammaticality of the coordinate structure in
(81) is predicted:
(81)

János [[le
ı́rta] és [fel olvasta]] a verset.
John down put and up read
the poem
‘John wrote down and read out the poem.’

The minimal predicate

61

However, the grammaticality of (81) provides no evidence for structure (80); it
could also be derived from (78) by right node raising.15
The contradictory evidence indicating the phrasal nature of prefix movement,
and the incorporated head status of the prefix in surface structure can be resolved
if we analyze the prefix as a projection both minimal and maximal, capable of
acting either as a phrase or as a head. Suppose that the verbal prefix is generated
in postverbal position as an AdvP complement of the V; then it undergoes phrasal
movement into the specifier position of a functional projection dominating the
finite VP, e.g. into Spec,AspP; and eventually it cliticizes to the adjacent verb.16
As a summary, consider the steps of the derivation of the sentence János fel
olvasta a verseit ‘John read out his poems’. For clarity’s sake the morphosyntactic
projections extending the VP are omitted.
(82)

a.

VP

V
olvasta

DP
a verseit

AdvP DP
fel János
AspP

b.

Spec

Asp'
Asp

VP
V AdvP

feli

15

olvastaj

tj

ti

DP

DP

János

a verseit

The head versus phrasal status of the verbal prefix has been a matter of controversy
for decades. Until the possibility of head movement was accepted in generative theory,
prefix movement could only be analyzed as phrasal movement – compare É. Kiss (1981,
1987a) – at least within the Chomskian framework. Lexical-functionalists were the first to
argue for the head properties of the verbal prefix (see Ackerman 1984, Komlósy 1985).
Noticing the argument against the phrasal analysis of the prefix that (79) represents,
É. Kiss (1998d) analyzes prefix movement as incorporation into the verb. Koopman and
Szabolcsi (2000) argue for the phrasal status of verb modifiers.
16
The process of merger taking place between two adjacent heads in the functional domain
was observed by Dobrovie-Sorin (1993), who listed various Romanian and French examples of it. Following a suggestion of Cardinaletti and Starke (1999), Bródy (1999) argues
(in connection with the cliticization of the negative particle to the verb) that a specifier
can be spelled out in the adjacent head of the projection based on the full matching of
its features with the feature of the head.

62

The syntax of Hungarian
c.

TopP
Top'

Spec
Top

AspP
Asp'

Spec
Asp

Jánosk

VP
V

Adv

DP

ti feliolvastaj tj

ti

tk a verseit

DP

The next question to answer is what triggers the movement of the prefix into
preverbal position. We have already discussed one reason why the prefix could not
stay in the VP: it would violate the referentiality constraint, which forbids nonreferential expressions in postverbal position. The prefix also has another reason
to leave the VP: as is discussed in the next section, it plays a perfectivizing role,
hence it must move into the specifier of an aspect projection.

3.6.2

The AspP projection

In the most common case, the verbal prefix complements a process verb,
and in addition to modifying its lexical meaning also turns it into a verb of accomplishment, to be used perfectively (see Kiefer 1992a, 1994a, 1994b). This is
what happens if olvas is supplied with el, át, meg, rá, or be. The difference in
the aspectual potential of olvas and for example átolvas can be pointed out by
showing that the former cannot be combined with a temporal adverb specifying
the endpoint of a period within which the action has been performed (e.g. with a
by phrase or an in phrase), whereas the latter cannot be combined with a temporal
adverb specifying an interval.17
(83) a. * János hétfőre
olvasta a regényt.
John by.Monday read the novel
‘John read the novel by Monday.’
b.

17

János egész este
olvasta a regényt.
John whole evening read the novel
‘John read the novel the whole evening.’

These tests and many others were proposed by Kiefer (1992a, 1994a, 1994b) in his
detailed studies of aspect in Hungarian.

The minimal predicate
(84) a.

63

János hétfőre
el olvasta a regényt.
John by.Monday VM read the novel
‘John read the novel by Monday.’

b. * János egész este
el olvasta a regényt.
John whole evening VM read the novel
‘John read the novel the whole evening.’

Felolvas, which can retain the process meaning of olvas, is exceptional in this
respect – it is marginally also acceptable with an adverb denoting an interval:
(85) a.

János nyolc órára /egy fél óra alatt fel olvasta a verseit.
John by eight /a half hour in up read his poems
‘John read out his poems by eight/in half an hour.’

b. ? János egész este
fel olvasta a verseit.
John whole evening up read his poems
‘John read out his poems the whole evening.’

Intuitively, the prefix makes the perfective reading possible by incorporating a
direction, hence a potential endpoint, into the process expressed by the base verb.
Nevertheless, perfectivization is not merely a lexical process; the perfective reading
only arises if the prefix immediately precedes the verb; compare:
(86) a.

Fel mentem a toronyba.
up went-I the tower-to
‘I went up the tower.’

b.

(Épp)  mentem  fel a  toronyba, amikor ki tört a zivatar.
just went-I up the tower-to when out broke the thunderstorm
‘I was (just) going up the tower when the thunderstorm broke out.’

c.



Mentem (már) fel a toronyba./  Megyek (még) fel a toronyba.
went-I
already up the tower-to go-I
still up the tower-to
‘I have (already) been up the tower./ I will (still) go up the tower.’

The sentence in (86b) is progressive, whereas (86c) expresses an experiential
reading, meaning that the event described in the VP has already taken place – or
will yet take place – at indefinite times, but at least once. The two interpretations
are conveyed by identical strings associated with different stress patterns. In the
progressive sentence every major constituent bears a primary stress, whereas in
the experiential sentence only the verb is stressed. Interestingly, in the case of the
exceptional felolvas, the progressive reading can be expressed by the same string as
the perfective one; only the experiential reading must be expressed by the reverse
order of the prefix and the verb; compare:
(87) a.

Fel olvastam a verseimet.
out read-I
the poems-my
‘I read out my poems.’

64

The syntax of Hungarian
b.

(Éppen) fel olvastam/olvastam fel a verseimet, amikor ki tört a
just
up read
read
up my poems
when out broke the
zivatar.
thunderstorm
‘I was just reading out my poems when the thunderstorm broke out.’

c.

Olvastam már
fel verseimet.
read-I
already out poems-my
‘I have already read out my poems.’

There is also a further significant fact to account for: if the VP is extended into
a focus phrase, the difference between the perfective and the progressive aspect
is neutralized; the sentences are ambiguous. Thus, the ‘focus–verb–prefix’ order
in the following sentence is compatible either with a time adverbial specifying a
period by the end of which the action has been performed, or with a time adverbial
specifying a point of time at which the given action was in progress.
(88) a.

b.

JÁNOS ment fel a toronyba (éppen), amikor a zivatar
ki tört.
John went up the tower-to just
when the thunderstorm out broke
‘It was John who was going up the tower when the thunderstorm broke out.’
JÁNOS ment fel a toronyba nyolc órára.
‘It was John who had gone up the tower by eight.’

To capture these facts, let us assume that the aspect of the VP (at the same time,
also the aspect of the sentence) is determined by an AspP subsuming the (morphosyntactically extended) VP.18 The Asp head can have various features (according to Kiefer (1994a, 1994b) it can be [+/–eventive]; [+eventive] aspect can be
[+/–perfective]; [−perfective] can be [+/–restricted], the [+restricted] value corresponding to progressive, etc.). The prefix acts as an aspectualizer, and as such
it must be raised into Spec,AspP – to take scope over the VP, or to check the
[+perfective] feature of the Asp head, depending on our theoretical presuppositions. This is what we attest in (84a), (86a), and (87a). The perfective reading
of felolvas in (85a) also arises in this way (I assume that the fel complement of
olvas is marked [+/–perfective]). Let us also make the (theoretically motivated)
assumption that the V moves to Asp, to check the aspectual feature of Asp.
If the Asp head is progressive (i.e., [–perfective]), it will not tolerate a
[+perfective] prefix in Spec,AspP (see Piñon 1995). If the prefix has no lexical meaning apart from carrying the feature [+perfective] – as is the case with el
in elolvas – it will be omitted in the progressive. In such cases it is presumably
only the verb that moves up into Asp.
18

The proposed analysis is based on proposals of É. Kiss (1987a, 1992, 1994a), Kiefer
(1992a; 1994a), and Piñon (1995); it is closest to Piñon’s theory.

The minimal predicate
(89)

65

(Éppen) olvastam (* el) a regényt, amikor ki tört a zivatar
just
read-I
VM the novel when out broke the thunderstorm
‘I was just reading the novel when the thunderstorm broke out.’

The same holds for durative perfectivizing prefixes. These prefixes express that
the event denoted by the VP is both indivisible as regards its temporal structure,
and simultaneously also long lasting. In the progressive the durative perfectivizing
prefix must be omitted:
(90) a.

Nagypapa el üldögélt a lócán.
Grandpa VM sat
the bench-on
‘Grandpa sat long on the bench.’

b. * Nagypapa éppen üldögélt el a lócán.
‘Grandpa was just sitting long on the bench.’
c.

Nagypapa éppen üldögélt a lócán, amikor kitört a zivatar.
‘Grandpa was just sitting on the bench when the thunderstorm broke out.’

When the perfectivizing prefix also makes a lexical contribution, it is retained in
the progressive, as well; it is interpreted as a referential adverb with no aspectual
feature (91a). It is often replaced by a heavier version (containing the suffix -felé
‘-wards’), which obviously serves to indicate that the adverb does not act as an
aspectual operator. A prefix denoting an endpoint or direction often goes together
with a goal complement. In that case the prefix deprived of its aspectual feature
and the goal noun phrase form an appositive construction (91b).
(91) a.

b.

[TopP Jánosi [AspP (éppen) [Asp´ mentj [VP ti tj fel(felé)]]] amikor a zivatar
John
just
went
up(wards) when the thunderstorm
kitört ]
out.broke
‘John was just going up when the thunderstorm broke out.’
[TopP Jánosi [AspP (éppen) [Asp´ mentj [VP ti tj [fel a toronyba]]]] amikor a
John
just
went
up the tower
when the
zivatar
kitört ]
thunderstorm out.broke
‘John was just going up the tower when the thunderstorm broke out.’

When interpreted as a referential argument, the prefix receives a primary stress. If
it participates in an appositive construction, the other member of the construction
will also be stressed – that is how the stress pattern associated with the progressive,
consisting of a series of heavy stresses, arises.
A condition of the analysis of the prefix as a referential adverb is that it must
have a separate meaning component, i.e., the meaning of the prefixed verb must
be compositional – see Kiefer (1994a, 1994b) and Piñon (1995). In the case of

66

The syntax of Hungarian

non-compositional verbs the failure of prefix movement into Spec,Asp will not
yield a progressive interpretation; compare:
(92) a. * János (éppen) rúgott be, amikor haza vitte a felesége.
John just
kicked in when home took his wife-NOM
‘John was just getting drunk when his wife took him home.’
b. * A sámán éppen olvasott rá a betegre, amikor kitört
a zivatar.
the shaman just read
on the sick-on when out.broke the thunderstorm
‘The shaman was just bewitching the sick man when the thunderstorm broke
out.’

For the progressive reading to arise, the verb to be raised to the progressivemarked Asp must also have an appropriate Aktionsart feature, i.e., it cannot denote
a momentary action; it must denote a process; compare:
(93)

* János éppen pillantott fel az újságból,
amikor beléptem.
John just glanced up the newspaper-from when entered-I
‘John was just glancing up from the newspaper when I entered.’

The experiential reading illustrated in (86c) involves verb movement into a
higher functional head position, presumably into F. Evidence for the fact that the
verb is not in AspP is provided by the fact that it precedes the adverbs már ‘already’
and még ‘yet’, which are left-adjoined to AspP in the unmarked case; compare:
(94) a.

b.

János [AspP már [AspP fel ment a toronyba]] → János menti már ti fel a
John
already up went the tower-to
toronyba.
‘John has already gone up the tower.’
‘John has already been up the tower.’
János [AspP még [AspP fel megy a toronyba]] → János megyi még ti fel a
John
yet
up goes the tower-to
toronyba.
‘John will still go up the tower.’
‘John will go up the tower yet
(at least once).’

The assumption that the experiential verb is raised into the F head is also supported by phonological evidence. As is shown in Chapter 4, in focus constructions
typically everything but the focus is presupposed, hence typically nothing but the
focus is stressed. This is what we attest in experiential constructions of this type:
only the focussed verb bears stress – as opposed to progressive sentences.
What is left to clarify is the case of felolvas under the non-perfective reading.
Fel in its non-perfective reading resembles a class of prefixes whose lexical meaning expresses location rather than direction or goal, among them itt ‘here’, ott
‘there’, lent ‘down’, fent ‘up’, kint ‘out(side)’, bent ‘in(side)’, etc. These prefixes
are used, for example, to turn a VP containing a stative (i.e., [–eventive]) verb
into imperfective (i.e., [+eventive], [–restricted]). Intuitively they serve to anchor

The minimal predicate

67

spatiotemporally the state denoted by the base verb.19 The meaning difference
between the (a) and (b) sentences in (95)–(96) is very hard to render in English:
(95) a.

b.

(96) a.

b.

A taxi állt a kapu előtt.
the taxi stood the gate in.front.of
‘The taxi was standing in front of the gate.’
A taxi ott állt a kapu előtt.
the taxi there stood the gate in.front.of
‘The taxi was standing there in front of the gate.’
A gyerekek alszanak az emeleten.
the children sleep
the second.floor-on
‘The children are sleeping on the second floor.’
A gyerekek fent alszanak az emeleten.
the children up sleep
the second.floor-on
‘The children are sleeping up on the second floor.’

In the following construction the location prefix is obligatory with the locative van
‘be’. (For some reason, van cannot bear the phrasal stress falling on the left edge
of the VP.) Compare:
(97) a. * [TopP Az elnök
képe [VP van minden kirakatban]]
the president’s portrait is every shop-window-in
‘The president’s portrait is in every shop window.’
b.

[TopP Az elnök
képe [AspP ott/kint/bent van minden kirakatban]]
the president’s portrait there/out/in is every shop-window-in
‘The president’s portrait is there in every shop window.’

Although still very little is known about the semantics of the construction illustrated
in (95b), (96b), and (97b), we can safely hypothesize that it involves an AspP
projection with a head marked as [+eventive], [–perfective], [–restricted]. Both
the prefix to be raised to Spec,AspP, and the verb to be raised to Asp must have
inherent features that are compatible with the [–perfective] feature of Asp.
Stative verbs like imád ‘adore’, gyűlöl ‘hate’, tud ‘know’ have no verb modifier.
Presumably they merge with a [–eventive] Asp head, which triggers V movement
but attracts nothing to Spec,AspP.

3.6.3

The class of verb modifiers

Spec,AspP is not open only to verbal prefixes, i.e., adverbs. Non-adverbial
complements can also function as aspectualizers – even if the aspectual roles of
19

Compare Csirmaz and Surányi (1998).

68

The syntax of Hungarian

their various types are more varied and less well understood than those of the
verbal prefix.20
Non-adverbial complements of an aspectualizing function include bare nominal objects, bare nominal oblique complements (goals and locations), bare nonagentive subjects, predicative nouns and adjectives, as well as bare infinitives; for
example:
(98) a.

János újságot
olvas.
John newspaper-ACC reads
‘John is engaged in newspaper-reading.’

b.

János piacra ment.
John market-to went
‘John went to the market.’

c.

János ágyban maradt.
John bed-in stayed
‘John stayed in bed.’

d.

Levél érkezett.
letter arrived
‘A letter arrived.’

e.

János orvos lesz.
John doctor becomes
‘John will become a doctor.’

f.

János hı́res lesz.
John famous becomes
‘John will become famous.’

g.

Jánost
gazdagnak tartják.
John-ACC rich-DAT consider-they
‘John is considered rich.’

h.

Jánost
boldoggá
tette a hı́r.
John-ACC happy-TRANSLATIVE made the news
‘The news made John happy.’

i.

János úszni
fog.
John swim-INF will
‘John will swim.’

Similar to the verbal prefix, these types of complements are non-referential. Like
the prefix, they are phrases (NPs and AdjPs) constituted by a mere head. They also
share the distribution of the verbal prefix; they are alternatives to it in the sentence.
20

The generalizations summarized in this section are quoted from Kiefer (1992a) and
(1994a). Maleczki (1992) gives a detailed semantic analysis of bare nominal complements. On the role of bare nominals and the definiteness effect, see L. Kálmán (1995).

The minimal predicate

69

Thus, in neutral sentences the bare nominal immediately precedes the finite verb
(99a), whereas in the presence of a focus or a negative particle the verb leaves the
verb modifier behind (99b,c). The verb modifier can also be separated from the
verb by the emphatic particle is (99d). The verb modifier can be focussed (99e),
it can undergo contrastive topicalization (99f), and it can also be subject to long
operator movement from an infinitive phrase (99g) or a CP (99h).
(99) a.

Mari ebédet
főz.
Mary lunch-ACC cooks
‘Mary cooks lunch.’

b.

Mari A KEDVÜNKÉRT főz ebédet.
Mary for.our.sake
cooks lunch
‘It is for our sake that Mary cooks lunch.’

c.

Mari nem főz ebédet.
Mary not cooks lunch
‘Mary doesn’t cook lunch.’

d.

Mari ebédet
akart főzni, és ebédet
is főzött.
Mary lunch-ACC wanted to.cook, and lunch-ACC also cooked
‘Mary wanted to cook lunch, and lunch she cooked.’

e.

Mari EBÉDET főzött, nem pedig
vacsorát.
Mary lunch-ACC cooked not on.the.other.hand supper-ACC
‘It was lunch that Mary cooked, not supper.’

f.

Ebédet MARI főzött, vacsorát
pedig
PÉTER.
lunch-ACC Mary cooked supper-ACC on.the.other.hand Peter
‘Lunch was cooked BY MARY, supper, on the other hand, BY PETER.’

g.

Mari ebédet
szeretne főzni.
Mary lunch-ACC would.like to.cook
‘Mary would like to cook lunch.’

h.

Ebédet kell, hogy főzzek.
lunch-ACC needs that I.cook
‘It is necessary that I cook lunch.’

In view of these facts there can be no doubt about it that bare nominals and verbal
prefixes represent the same functional class in syntax – even if the precise semantic
content of the functions of their various types (i.e., their precise contribution to
the aspect of the VP, their interaction with the meaning of the verb, with its tense,
with its argument structure, with the specificity/definiteness of the arguments, with
the quantifiers present in the clause, with negation, etc.) is not fully understood at
present.
The aspectualizer function is clearest in the case of bare nominals of goal function (i.e., noun phrases supplied with an illative, sublative, or allative case); for

70

The syntax of Hungarian

example:
(100) a. János iskolába ment.
John school-in went
‘John went to school.’
b. Péter kirándulásra ment.
Peter excursion-on went
‘Peter went on an excursion.’
c. Mari férjhez
ment.
Mary husband-to went
‘Mary got married.’

By imposing a limit or endpoint on the motion expressed by the verb, these complements have a perfectivizing value, similar to that of the verbal prefix.
Bare nominal complements bearing an inessive, superessive, or adessive case,
on the other hand, play a role similar to verbal prefixes expressing a location; they
serve to anchor stative verbs spatiotemporally; compare:
(101) a. János iskolában marad.
John school-in remains
‘John remains in school.’
b. János kórházban tartózkodik.
John hospital-in stays
‘John stays in hospital.’
c. János meccsen van.
John match-on is
‘John is at a football match.’
d. János egész délelőtt orvosnál ült.
John whole morning doctor-at sat
‘John was sitting at the doctor’s the whole morning.’

Resultative adjectives supplied with the -ra/re sublative suffix or the -vá/vé translative suffix also have a delimiting function in the case of certain verbs expressing a
process; hence, they also act as perfectivizers; for example:
(102) a. [TopP János [AspP zöldre
festette a kaput]]
John
green-SUBLATIVE painted the gate-ACC
‘John painted the gate green.’
b. [TopP A királyfi [AspP békává
vált]]
the prince
frog-TRANSLATIVE turned
‘The prince turned into a frog.’

Sentences with a bare nominal aspectualizer are derived in the same way as
sentences containing a verbal prefix. The bare nominal (an NP) is generated in
postverbal argument position; however, not being referential, it cannot stay there.

The minimal predicate

71

It is raised to Spec,AspP, and its aspectual feature has to match that of the Asp head.
The verb is raised to Asp, and eventually it merges with the bare nominal. Evidence
for the bare nominal–verb merge is provided by the coordination test; compare:
(103) a. [TopP János [AspP kezet [Asp fogott Péterrel]] és [AspP kezet [Asp rázott Jánossal]]]
John
hand-ACC took Peter-with and
hand-ACC shook John-with
‘John clasped hands with Peter and shook hands with John.’
b. * [TopP János [AspP kezet [Asp [Asp fogott Péterrel] és [Asp rázott Jánossal]]]]

Unless the bare noun and the verb merge into a complex head, there is no obvious
way to predict the ungrammaticality of (103b).21

3.7

The nominal predicate

Nominal and adjectival predicates were also included tentatively in the
set of verb modifiers above (98e,f). Even though sentences containing a nominal
or adjectival predicate have not been subject to a thorough investigation in the
generative framework, there has been a consensus in the respect that the syntactic
behavior of non-verbal predicates is – at least superficially – similar to that of verb
modifiers. Nevertheless, they represent a more severe descriptive problem than
do other types of verb modifiers – in part because the copula can also be missing
under certain circumstances, in which case the bare noun or adjective acts as the
lexical head of the predicate. This section aims to present some of the facts that a
future analysis will have to account for.
First observe the distribution of the copula in sentences with a nominal or
adjectival predicate:
(104)

21

Én beteg vagyok.
I sick am

Mi betegek vagyunk.
we sick-PL are

Te beteg vagy.
you sick are

Ti betegek vagytok.
you sick-PL are

Ő beteg.
he sick

Ők betegek.
they sick-PL

Or perhaps the coordination of the post-VM material in (79b) and (103b) is ruled out because the coordinated strings are not maximal AspPs but merely Asp projections. As will
become clear in Chapter 4, the bare nominal verb modifier can undergo focus movement
into Spec,FP. In such cases the VP, a maximal projection, can undergo coordination; for
example:
(i)

János [FP ARCON [[VP vágta Pétert]
és [VP csókolta Marit]]], nem pedig
John
cheek-on
hit Peter-ACC and kissed Mary-ACC not however
SZÁJON.
lip-on
‘It was on the cheek that John hit Peter and kissed Mary, and not on the lips.’

72

The syntax of Hungarian

(105) a. Ő beteg.
he sick
‘He is sick.’
b. Ő beteg volt.
he sick was
‘He was sick.’
Ő beteg lesz.
he sick will.be
‘He will be sick.’

Ő beteg lenne.
he sick be-COND-3SG
‘He would be sick.’
Ő legyen
beteg!
he be-IMPER-3SG sick
‘Let him be sick!’

c. Ő beteg akar lenni.
he sick wants be-INF
‘He wants to be sick.’
(106)

Én tanár vagyok.
I teacher am

Mi tanárok vagyunk.
we teachers are

Te tanár vagy.
you teacher are

Ti tanárok vagytok.
you teachers are

János tanár.
John teacher

János és Péter tanárok.
John and Peter teachers

(107) a. János és Péter tanárok.
John and Peter teachers
‘John and Peter are teachers.’
b. János és Péter tanárok voltak.
John and Peter teachers were

János és Péter tanárok lennének.
John and Peter teachers be-COND-3PL

János és Péter tanárok lesznek.
John and Peter teachers will.be

János és Péter legyenek
tanárok!
John and Peter be-IMPER-3PL teachers

What these examples demonstrate is that adjectival predicates like beteg ‘sick’, and
nominal predicates like tanár ‘teacher’ are accompanied by the copula in every
tense – whether finite or non-finite – every mood and every person, except for
present indicative 3rd person singular and plural. The copula is spelled out when at
least one of the morphosyntactic projections in the predicate has a phonologically
salient [+suffix] head, which needs a stem to attach to. The present tense marker, the
indicative mood marker, and the 3rd person singular subject agreement marker are
phonologically null, hence they need no carrier. The present indicative 3rd person
plural subject agreement marker is phonologically real; however, its function is
also expressed by the plural marker added to the predicative noun or adjective.
That is, the copula appears to be an expletive which is present if and only if
its presence is required by a morphophonological constraint. In sentences like
(105a) and (107a), in which the copula has no role to play, there is no reason to
assume one; the predicate phrase must be of the category AdjP/NP. This claim

The minimal predicate

73

is supported by the fact that in these sentences the predicative adjective or noun,
representing the lexical head of the predicate, cannot be extracted, e.g. it cannot
undergo contrastive topicalization – unlike an adjective or noun accompanying the
copula:
(108) a. * [TopP /Beteg [FP JÁNOS]]
sick
John
‘It is John who is sick.’
compare:
b. [TopP /Beteg [FP JÁNOS volt]]
sick
John was
‘It was John who was sick.’

Notice that the construction represented by (108a), consisting of a contrastive topic
and a focus, is not ungrammatical in itself – provided the topic position is filled
by a phrase:
(109)

[TopP /A legsúlyosabb beteg [FP JÁNOS]]
the gravest
patient John
‘It is John who is the gravest patient.’

In sentences in which the copula is spelled out, the focus constituent in Spec,FP
must be followed by the copula, whereas the adjectival/nominal verb modifier can
stand anywhere in the VP (110a,b). In the case of a nominal/adjectival predicate,
the constituent that must be adjacent to the focus is the noun or adjective (110c),
so the logical conclusion is that the focus is followed by a noun phrase or adjective
phrase:
(110) a. [FP JÁNOS volt beteg a honvágytól]
John was sick the homesickness-from
‘John was sick with homesickness.’
b. [FP JÁNOS volt a honvágytól beteg]
c. [FP JÁNOS beteg a honvágytól]
John sick the homesickness-from
‘John is sick with homesickness.’
d. * [FP JÁNOS a honvágytól beteg]

These examples suggest that, when the copula is not spelled out, it is not merely
phonologically null but is absent altogether. Unfortunately, other aspects of the
verbless construction, e.g. that in (110c), are not at all clear; for example: does
the structure without the copula have a TenseP projection? If it does not, what
licenses the nominative case of the subject? If there is a TenseP, does the adjective
merge with the phonologically null tense suffix, or does it skip TenseP? As for

74

The syntax of Hungarian

(110a), the copula is likely to be inserted as the head of a VP, taking an NP or
AdjP complement. Then the NP or AdjP is presumably moved to the specifier of
an AspP, to check the [+stative] feature of the Asp head, and the copula is raised
to Asp. Crucially, the syntactic relation of a predicative adjective or noun and an
expletive does not differ from a verb modifier–lexical verb relation in any respect.
Compare the position of a standard verb modifier and a verb, and that of a nominal
predicate and a copula in various sentence types:
(111) a. János [AspP betegre
tanulta magát]
John
sick-TRANSLATIVE learned himself
‘John learned himself sick.’
b. János [AspP beteg volt]
John
sick was
‘John was sick.’
(112) a. [FP JÁNOS [AspP tanulta magát betegre]]
‘It was John who learned himself sick.’
b. [FP JÁNOS [AspP volt beteg]]
‘It was John who was sick.’
(113) a. János betegre
szokta tanulni magát.
John sick-TRANSLATIVE used to.learn himself
‘John used to learn himself sick.’
b. János beteg szokott lenni.
John sick used to.be
‘John used to be sick.’
(114) a. Csak betegre
nem szabad [CP hogy tanuld magad]!
only sick-TRANSLATIVE not must
that you.learn yourself
‘Only you mustn’t learn yourself sick!’
b. Csak beteg nem szabad [CP hogy légy]!
only sick not must
that you.be
‘Only you mustn’t be sick!’

According to the evidence of (111)–(114) the distribution of the nominal predicate
and the copula is identical with that of the verb modifier and the verb, which follows
if nominal and adjectival predicates are included in the class of verb modifiers. A
consequence of this tentative solution is that nominal/adjectival predicates end up in
Spec,AspP, where they check the [+stative] feature of Asp. The expletive is raised
to Asp, and – unless it moves on to a higher functional head – the nominal/adjectival
predicate cliticizes to it.

The minimal predicate

3.8

75

Summary

This chapter has discussed the structure of the minimal predicate, which
consists of a VP extended by morphosyntactic projections, and an AspP. The VP
is a V-initial phrase displaying free argument order. It is subject to a referentiality
constraint: it can only host referential arguments. Non-referential complements
must join the preverbal, predicative section of the sentence via operator movement.
The subject is also internal to the VP.22 It does not have to be raised into
Spec,AgrSP visibly; it only leaves the VP if it is topicalized, or if it undergoes operator movement. The tests which prove the VP-external position of the subject in
English prove the VP-external status of the topic in Hungarian. Thus, in Hungarian
VP-deletion is a transformation which deletes the V and its non-topicalized complements, and spells out the topic – whether it be represented by the subject or the
object. In idiomatic sentences with a non-idiomatic variable the idiom is confined
to the VP, and the non-idiomatic variable is in topic position. Further evidence of
the lack of a VP-external subject position is provided by the lack of any superiority effect in wh-movement. The question of whether the VP is hierarchical, with
the subject asymmetrically c-commanding the object VP-internally, is harder to
answer. The evidence is controversial: subject–object symmetries in disjoint reference and Weak Crossover, as well as the total freedom of postverbal word order
argue for a flat VP. Anaphora and disjoint reference between two lexical noun
phrases, on the other hand, provide evidence of a hierarchy of arguments. This
hierarchy is other than a subject > object > oblique complement hierarchy; according to the evidence of psych verbs and causative verbs, it is based on thematic
prominence.
The VP is extended by a set of morphosyntactic heads including modality, tense,
mood, object agreement, and subject agreement. The object agreement marker is of
22

The question in what sense the EPP can be maintained in Hungarian is addressed in
É. Kiss (to appear), where the EPP is split into a predication requirement and a requirement on argument ordering, namely:
(i)
(ii)

EPP1
A sentence expressing predication must contain a topic.
EPP2
Of the arguments of a predicate, one must be marked as a subject.

EPP2 has the consequence that each verb taking at least one argument will have a
nominative complement – without implying that the given complement is associated
with an invariant position. The solution of Alexiadou and Anagnostopoulou (1998), i.e.,
the checking of the EPP-feature of AgrS via V-to-AgrS movement, is also applicable to
Hungarian.

76

The syntax of Hungarian

particular interest: it is an invariant suffix appearing on finite verbs taking a definite
object. The facts that transitive infinitives take no object agreement marker, and in
infinitival constructions with a transitive matrix verb the carrier of AgrO and the
source of accusative case are different suggest that AgrO may not be the locus of
accusative assignment.
Most verbs have a lexically selected complement represented by a bare head: a
so-called verb modifier, which has crucial role in determining the aspect of the VP.
It has contradictory, clitic-like syntactic properties: it can move like a phrase, even
at long distances – but when immediately preceding the verb, it seems to form a
complex head with it. In the proposed analysis it undergoes phrasal movement to
Spec,AspP, and then it merges with the V raised to Asp.

4

Focussing
The morphosyntactically extended VP can merge with logical operators
expressing exhaustive identification, negation, and quantification. Although these
elements appear at the head of the predicate, they act as propositional operators.
They can be preceded at most by other (wider scope) propositional operators, and
topicalized constituents, which are referring expressions, and hence are outside
the scope of all operators, whatever their surface position relative to them.

4.1

The focus function

As was demonstrated in Chapter 3, the predicate phrase of a neutral sentence begins with a ‘VM V’ string; so a noun phrase preceding a VM + V complex
is a predicate-phrase-external topic. A constituent followed by a ‘V(. . .)VM’ string,
on the other hand, is still internal to the predicate phrase; it represents the semantically and phonologically most emphatic element of the predicate; it functions as
a focus:
(1) a.

b.
c.

[TopP Pétert [Predicate [Focus JÁNOS] mutatta
be Marinak]]
Peter-ACC
John introduced VM Mary-to
‘As for Peter it was John who introduced him to Mary.’
[TopP János [Predicate [Focus PÉTERT] mutatta be Marinak]]
‘As for John, it was Peter that he introduced to Mary.’
[TopP Pétert [Predicate [Focus MARINAK] mutatta be János]]
‘As for Peter, it was to Mary that John introduced him.’

The phonological prominence of the focus (which is marked in the Hungarian text
by small capitals throughout this book) arises not only from its primary stress but
also from the fact that it obligatorily deletes the stress of the verb following it, and
forms a single phonological word with it. (Usually the postverbal constituents of the
VP are also unstressed, representing presupposed information.) Semantically, the
focus is more than merely non-presupposed information; it expresses exhaustive
identification from among a set of alternatives. Consider (1a); this sentence is used
77

78

The syntax of Hungarian

in a situation or context in which it can be potentially true of a set of persons,
including John, that they introduced Peter to Mary. Example (1a) expresses that
of this set it is John and no-one else for whom it holds that he introduced Peter
to Mary. That is, an operator performing exhaustive identification is at work in
this sentence: it operates on a set of alternative individuals for whom the VP can
potentially hold, exhaustively identifying the subset for which the VP holds, and
excluding the complementary subset. The focus constituent (or identificational
focus according to É. Kiss 1998b) represents the value of this invisible operator.
In (1b) the operator performing exhaustive identification operates on a set of
persons of whom it can be potentially true that John introduced them to Mary, and it
identifies Peter as the one for whom this holds, excluding everyone else. In (1c) the
operation of exhaustive identification is performed on a set of individuals of whom
it can be true that John introduced Peter to them, and identifies Mary as the subset of
this set for whom this holds, excluding the others. Generalizing our observations:
(2)

The function of focus
The focus represents a proper subset of the set of contextually or situationally
given referents for which the predicate phrase can potentially hold; it is identified
as the exhaustive subset of this set for which the predicate phrase holds.1

Exhaustive identification is a function of the immediately preverbal focus constituent, and of that constituent only, which can be demonstrated by showing that
the exhaustiveness associated with the preverbal focus is absent in other sentence
positions. Various tests have been proposed to point out exhaustive identification,
and they only give a positive result in the case of the preverbal constituent. A test
of Szabolcsi (1981a) is based on a pair of sentences which differ only in that the
constituent to be tested for its [+focus] feature consists of two coordinate DPs in
the first sentence, one of which is dropped in the second; for example:
(3) a.

János PÉTERT ÉS ZOLTÁNT mutatta
be Marinak.
John Peter-ACC and Zoltan-ACC introduced VM Mary-to
‘As for John, it was Peter and Zoltan that he introduced to Mary.’

b.

János PÉTERT mutatta
be Marinak.
John Peter-ACC introduced VM Mary-to
‘As for John, it was Peter that he introduced to Mary.’

(4) a.

János bemutatta Marinak Pétert
és Zoltánt.
John introduced Mary-to Peter-ACC and Zoltan-ACC
‘John introduced Peter and Zoltan to Mary.’

1

The proposed interpretation of the focus function adopts features of the semantic focus definitions of Kenesei (1986), Szabolcsi (1994b), Jacobs (1986), von Stechow and
Uhmann (1986), Krifka (1992), and others.

Focussing
b.

79

János bemutatta Marinak Pétert.
John introduced Mary-to Peter-ACC
‘John introduced Peter to Mary.’

If the (b) sentence is a logical consequence of the (a) sentence, as is the case in
(4) – i.e., if John introducing Peter and Zoltan to Mary implies that John introduced Peter to Mary – then the constituents tested (Pétert és Zoltánt; Pétert) do
not express exhaustive identification. If the (b) sentence does not follow from the
(a) sentence, on the contrary, it contradicts the (a) sentence, then the constituents
in question are foci expressing exhaustive identification. This latter state of affairs
is the case in (3): if it was Peter and Zoltan whom John introduced to Mary, then
it is not true that it was Peter whom John introduced to Mary. Examples (4a,b), on
the other hand, contain no identificational focus.
Consider also the dialogue in (5). Example (5a) can be continued by (5b) only
because its Pétert element expresses exhaustive identification.2
(5) a.

b.

János PÉTERT mutatta
be Marinak.
John Peter-ACC introduced VM Mary-to
‘As for John, it was Peter that he introduced to Mary.’
Nem, Zoltánt
is bemutatta neki.
no Zoltan-ACC also introduced to.her
‘No, he also introduced Zoltan to her.’

Since this dialogue describes a situation in which John did introduce Peter to
Mary, the negation of John introducing Peter to Mary can be interpreted only as
the negation of exhaustivity. If in such a dialogue negation applies to a postverbal
emphatic constituent, as in (6), the dialogue is nonsensical:
(6) a.

b.

János bemutatta Marinak Pétert.
John introduced Mary-to Peter-ACC
‘John introduced Peter to Mary.’
* Nem, Zoltánt
is bemutatta neki.
no Zoltan-ACC also introduced to.her
‘No, he also introduced Zoltan to her.’

Focus is often said to express a contrast. Indeed, often a contrast can be inferred
between the two subsets of the relevant set delineated: the subset of which the
predicate is true, and the complementary subset, of which the predicate is not true.
For example, if in the case of (1a) the relevant persons who could have introduced
Peter to Mary are John and his brother, then the exhaustive identification of John
as the person who introduced Peter to Mary implies a contrast between John and
2

This test of exhaustive identification was proposed by Donka Farkas (personal
communication).

80

The syntax of Hungarian

his brother in this respect (‘It was John and not his brother who introduced Peter to
Mary’). The identificational focus, however, only implies a contrast when the relevant set on which the operation of exhaustive identification is performed is a closed
set. If it is an open set, as in (7) below, the complementary subset, for which the
predicate does not hold, cannot be reconstructed, and hence no contrast arises.
(7) a.

b.

A Magyar rapszódiákat LISZT FERENC ı́rta.
the Hungarian rhapsodies-ACC Ferenc Liszt wrote
‘As for the Hungarian rhapsodies, it was Ferenc Liszt who wrote them.’
Liszt Ferenc 1886-BAN halt meg.
Ferenc Liszt 1886-in died VM
‘As for Ferenc Liszt, it was in 1886 that he died.’

The relevant set on which exhaustive identification is performed is an open set of
composers in (7a), and an open set of years in (7b); hence, it is not clear which composers the identification of Liszt excludes as the potential authors of the Hungarian
rhapsodies, or which years the identification of 1886 excludes as the time of Liszt’s
death.
The identification of a subset and the exclusion of the complementary subset
is an operation interpretable primarily on a set of individuals. Nevertheless, as
Szabolcsi (1981c, 1983a) argued, non-individual-denoting expressions (e.g. predicative NPs, AdvPs, AdjPs) can also be focussed, because – by opposing them
with their alternatives – focussing individuates them, creating the impression that
they denote distinct properties; compare:
(8) a.

János OROSZ LÁNYT vett feleségül.
John Russian girl-ACC took as.wife
‘As for John, it was a Russian girl that he married.’

b.

Péter OKOS LÁNYT akart feleségül venni, nem SZÉPET.
Peter smart girl-ACC wanted as.wife to.take not beautiful-ACC
‘As for Peter, it was a smart girl that he wanted to marry, not a beautiful one.’

c.

János FOKOZATOSAN értette
meg a problémát.
John gradually
understood VM the problem-ACC
‘As for John, it was gradually that he understood the problem.’

In (8a) the focussing of the predicative expression orosz lányt ‘Russian girl’ suggests that exhaustive identification is performed on a set of properties including
‘girl of Russian nationality’ and its alternatives, among them ‘girl of Hungarian
nationality’, etc. Whereas nationalities represent a natural class, in the case of
(8b) it is not immediately clear what the relevant alternatives to the property
okos lány are, but the elliptical sentence added to the clause helps: the alternative
excluded is the property szép lány ‘beautiful girl’. In the case of (8c), exhaustive identification is performed on manners. Fokozatosan ‘gradually’ has an inherent opposite, egyszerre ‘at once’, so the identification of fokozatosan as the

Focussing

81

manner in which the action denoted by the VP is performed means the exclusion of
egyszerre.
The set of individuals or individuated entities on which exhaustive identification
is performed is sometimes a set of sets. Consider (9), which contains a noun phrase
extended into a numeral phrase in focus position:
(9)

Az osztálykiránduláson TIZENÖT TANULÓ vett részt.
the class-excursion-on fifteen student took part
‘It was fifteen students who took part in the class excursion.’

If the numeral is stressed, the relevant alternatives on which the identificational
operator operates are subsets of various cardinality of some set of students, i.e., in
the case of a class of 30 students, a set of 1 student, a set of 2 students, . . . a set
of 29 students, and a set of 30 students. Having identified a set of 15 students as
the set for which the predicate holds, the sentence excludes the possibility of 14,
or 16 students taking part in the excursion. At the same time, however, it does not
also exclude the possibility of any number of adults taking part in it, as well. The
sets of adults are not among the entities taken into consideration in (9). This point
can also be illustrated by the following example:
(10)

JÁNOS vezet Mercedest.
John drives Mercedes-ACC
‘It is John who drives a Mercedes.’

In a situation in which (10) is likely to be uttered, it does not mean that János is
the only person on Earth who drives a Mercedes; it means that he is the only one
of the relevant persons (those under consideration) at the moment.
Whereas the focus constituent expressing exhaustive identification can be represented by a bare nominal or a numeral phrase, it cannot be represented by a
universal quantifier, or an existential quantifier of the vala- ‘some’ type. Consider:
(11) a. * János MINDENKIT mutatott be Marinak.
John everyone-ACC introduced VM Mary-to
‘It was everybody that John introduced to Mary.’
b. * János MINDKÉT FIÚT
mutatta
be Marinak.
John both
boy-ACC introduced VM Mary-to
‘It was both boys that John introduced to Mary.’
c. * János PÉTERT is mutatta
be Marinak.
John Peter-ACC too introduced VM Mary-to
‘It was Peter, too, that John introduced to Mary.’
(12)

* János VALAKIT
mutatott be Marinak.
John somebody-ACC introduced VM Mary-to
‘It was somebody that John introduced to Mary.’

As illustrated by these examples, both universal quantifiers (among them phrases
containing the additive particle is ‘also’) and existential quantifiers of the valaki

82

The syntax of Hungarian

‘somebody’ type are barred from focus position. Intuitively, universal quantifiers are unsuitable for the focus role because their function is incompatible with
exhaustive identification. Whereas the focus exhaustively identifies a proper subset
of some relevant set, excluding the complementary subset, the universal quantifier
identifies every element of the relevant set as such for which the content of the
VP holds. This is also true of is ‘also’ and még. . .is ‘even’ phrases, given that
a phrase like Pétert is is interpreted as ‘every relevant person plus Peter’. As is
clear from (11b), in the case of a universally quantified expression the relevant
set to be taken into consideration is always determined by the restrictor of the
universal quantifier, i.e., mindkét fiú ‘both boys’ or minden fiú ‘every boy’ cannot
be interpreted as the proper subset of some superset also including mindkét lány
‘both girls’ or minden felnőtt ‘every adult’. In the focus theory of Szabolcsi (1994b,
1997a), universal quantifiers are excluded from focus position because it can only
harbor group-denoting quantifiers.
Existential quantifiers are unsuitable for the focus role because – even if they
can be interpreted to identify a subset of some relevant set as such for which the
content of the VP holds – the identification they perform is by no means exhaustive.
If John introduced somebody to Mary, it does not follow that the given person was
the only one that John introduced to Mary.
The identifying operator whose value the focus constituent represents enters
into a scope relation with other operators. It takes scope over the operators it
c-commands, and it is in the scope of the operators c-commanding it; compare:
(13) a.

b.
(14) a.

b.

MARIT
hı́vta meg minden fiú.
Mary-ACC invited VM every boy
‘It was Mary that every boy invited.’
Minden fiú MARIT hı́vta meg.
‘For every boy, it was Mary that he invited.’
János PÉTERT nem mutatta
be Marinak.
John Peter-ACC not introduced VM Mary-to
‘It was Peter that John did not introduce to Mary.’
János nem PÉTERT mutatta be Marinak.
‘It was not Peter that John introduced to Mary.’

As is clear from the paraphrases, in (13a) exhaustive identification has scope over
universal quantification, whereas in (13b) universal quantification has scope over
exhaustive identification. In the latter case exhaustive identification is distributed
over the variables bound by the universal quantifier, i.e., the sentence expresses that
every boy has a set of persons eligible for invitation associated with him and, for
every boy, Mary represents the only member of this set whom he in fact invited.
In (14a) negation is in the scope of exhaustive identification, whereas in (14b)
exhaustive identification is in the scope of negation.

Focussing

4.2

The syntax of focus

4.2.1

Deriving the focus–verb adjacency

83

The reversal of the unmarked ‘VM V’ order in the ‘focus V VM’ string
(illustrated in (15) below), i.e., the required adjacency of the focus and the verb
represents the most conspicuous constraint on the apparently flexible word order
of the Hungarian sentence, which has intrigued linguists since the middle of the
19th century.3
(15) a.

János el
ment.
John away went
‘John went away.’

b. * JÁNOS el ment.
c.

JÁNOS ment el.
‘It was John who went away.’

The most obvious way of accounting for this constraint would be to assume that
the focus and the verb modifier are in complementary distribution in preverbal
position, i.e., that they compete for the same position, which, however, can only
harbor a single constituent. Although this approach accounts for the adjacency of
the focus and the verb, it raises other unsolvable problems (see Farkas 1986). If the
preverbal position is a landing site both for the focus and for the aspectualizer, it
cannot be associated with an invariant interpretation. Furthermore, when the sentence contains both an inherently focus-marked constituent and a verb modifier,
the preverbal slot will be occupied by the focus, with the verb modifier staying
behind the verb – which can only be ensured by an ad hoc ordering constraint.
The ‘complementary distribution’ approach is also undermined by facts of coordination. Namely, in the case of a ‘VM V XP’ string it is the ‘VM V’ section that
can be subject to coordination (16); in the case of a ‘focus V XP’ string, on the
other hand, it is the ‘V XP’ section (17), which suggests that the two strings are
structured differently ([[VM V] XP] versus [focus [V XP]]).
(16) a.

János össze szedte a széttépett levelet, és össze rakta a darabjait.
John together picked the torn-up letter-ACC and together pieced its parts-ACC
‘John collected the torn-up letter and pieced its parts together.’

→ * János [össze [[szedte a széttépett levelet] és [rakta a darabjait]]]
compare:
b.

3

János [[[ össze szedte] és [össze rakta]] a széttépett levelet]
John
together picked and together pieced the torn-up letter
‘John collected and pieced together the torn-up letter.’

For references of historical interest, see É. Kiss (1987a: 90).

84

The syntax of Hungarian

(17)

János [A MARI LEVELÉT [[tépte szét tegnap este] és [rakta össze
John the Mary’s letter-ACC tore up yesterday night and pieced together
ma reggel]]]
this morning
‘As for John, it was Mary’s letter that he tore up last night and pieced together
this morning.’

Deletion provides similar information about the constituency of the ‘VM V XP’
versus ‘focus V XP’ strings: the V XP string is a possible target of deletion only
in the latter case:
(18) a. * János nem sokáig tanulta a verset,
de meg
[ tanulta a verset]
John not long learned the poem-ACC but PERFECTIVE learned the poem-ACC
‘John hasn’t been learning the poem long, but he has (learned it).’
b.

Nem JÁNOS tudja a verset, hanem PÉTER [ tudja a verset].
not John knows the poem but
Peter knows the poem
‘It is not John that knows the poem but Peter.’

Bródy’s analysis of focus (1990a, 1990b, 1995) can derive the focus–verb adjacency without involving these problems. Bródy generates an additional functional
projection (FP) for the focus above the projection dominating the VM + V complex. He places the focus constituent into Spec,FP, and assumes V movement
across the VM into the F head.
Let us tentatively adopt Bródy’s idea, and let us assume that the AspP projection
of the verb is optionally extended into an FP, which is the projection of the abstract
operator performing exhaustive identification. The focus constituent, representing
the value of this operator, appears in Spec,FP. F attracts the verb, which moves from
Asp to F across the verb modifier in Spec,AspP, yielding the following structure:
FP

(19)
Spec

F'
F

AspP
Spec

Asp'
Asp

PÉTERTi

mutattaj

bek

Peter-ACC

introduced

VM

tj

VP
V

AdvP

DP

DP

DP

tj

tk

János

ti

Marinak

John

Mary-to

Focussing

85

(The derivation of (1b) involves one more step: the topicalization of the nominative
DP.) A non-trivial question that this approach raises is how to ‘excorporate’ the
verb from the verb modifier cliticized to it – recall (79)–(80) in Chapter 3 – or
how to block the incorporation of the verb modifier into the verb if and only if the
verb is raised into F.4 A further problem is that the proposed derivation predicts
that the verb modifier always surfaces in the immediately postverbal position. In
fact, the verb modifier can stand anywhere behind the verb; compare the following
with (19):
(20) a.

PÉTERT mutatta
János be Marinak.
Peter-ACC introduced John VM Mary-to

b.(?) PÉTERT mutatta János Marinak be.

In order to eliminate these problems, let us assume that the FP projection is not
an extension of AspP, but an alternative to it. That is, a VP must be extended either
into an AspP or into an FP. This proposal combines the advantages of the complementary distribution approach with the merits of Bródy’s theory without raising
the problems that they involve. Since a construction containing a VM incorporated
into V is not subject to further derivation, the necessity of excorporation does not
arise. What is more, since in a focus phrase the VM is in its base-generated position
in the VP, its order relative to the other verb complements is predicted to be free.
The elimination of AspP from the focus projection is also supported semantically.
As was demonstrated in Section 3.6.2., the aspectual operator is neutralized in
focus constructions; an FP is either vague or ambiguous aspectually.
The elimination of AspP from the focus projection also makes V movement
superfluous to a large extent. The only fact providing some empirical support for
the assumption of V movement is the word order of sentences containing both a
focus and an adverbial of manner or degree. Adverbials of manner and degree are
typically left-adjoined to AspP in a focusless sentence (although they can also stand
in the VP). In the presence of a focus, on the other hand, they surface postverbally;
compare:
(21) a.

[TopP János [AspP nagyon [AspP el szomorodott]]]
John
very
VM saddened
‘John became very sad.’

b. * JÁNOS nagyon szomorodott el.
c. JÁNOS szomorodott el nagyon.
d. JÁNOS szomorodott nagyon el.
4

Although Bródy (1990a) generates no AspP projection, his approach faces the same
excorporation problem: the prefixed verb is generated as a complex head under a node
labeled as V+.

86

The syntax of Hungarian

(22) a.

[TopP János [AspP gyorsan [AspP meg értette
a feladatot]]]
John
quickly
VM understood the task
‘John understood the task quickly.’

b. * Csak JÁNOS gyorsan értette meg a feladatot.
c. Csak JÁNOS értette meg gyorsan a feladatot.
d. Csak JÁNOS értette meg a feladatot gyorsan.

The sentences in (21c,d) and (22c,d) would clearly argue for a V-to-F movement
only if the adverb of manner or degree immediately followed the V; in fact, however, it can stand anywhere postverbally. I conclude that in the proposed framework
the assumption of V-to-F movement is unnecessary. The word order variants in
(21b) and (22b), with the adverb intervening between the focus and the V, may
be ruled out by a constraint requiring the adjacency of the focus and the V. Some
additional motivation for such a constraint is presented in Section 6.2.

4.2.2

The FP projection

In view of the above considerations, we assign to a Hungarian sentence
containing a focus the following structure:
FP

(23)

Spec

F'
F

VP
V

AdvP DP

PÉTERTi

mutatta

be

Peter-ACC

introduced

VM John

DP

DP

János ti Marinak
Mary-to

Movement into Spec,FP is an instance of operator movement; the focus phrase
binds a variable trace in argument position. This claim is supported by the fact that
a focus can license a parasitic gap; for example:
(24)

János [FP HÁROM LEVELETi dobott ki ti [PP anélkül, hogy elolvasott volna tp ]]
John
three letter-ACC threw out
without.it that read
had
‘It was three letters that John threw out without reading.’

The empty object in the embedded clause cannot be a pro, because a 3rd person
pro counts as a definite object, and would trigger the objective conjugation. The
verb elolvasott, however, which is obligatorily transitive, does not have the -( j)a
definite object marker; hence, the empty object it agrees with must be bound by
the indefinite matrix focus.

Focussing

87

The scope of focus – more precisely the scope of exhaustive identification – is
the domain c-commanded by the constituent in Spec,FP. Long focus movement is
also possible, in which case the focus constituent raised into the matrix Spec,FP,
naturally, has matrix scope; for example:
(25) a.

Nem szeretném,
hogy CSAK MARIVAL barátkozz.
not like-COND-1SG that only Mary-with friends.make-2SG
‘I wouldn’t like that you make friends only with Mary.’

b.

CSAK MARIVAL nem szeretném, hogy barátkozz.
‘It is only Mary that I wouldn’t like you to make friends with.’

In (25a) exhaustive interpretation is in the scope of matrix negation, whereas in
(25b) it has scope over it.
Since focus movement is substitution into Spec,FP, the extension of focus can
be neither smaller nor bigger than a major sentence constituent. Claims that the
focus can be both smaller and larger than an XP are based on a different notion of
focus; compare:
(26) a.

b.

JAPÁN autót vettél,
vagy NÉMETET?
Japanese car-ACC bought-you or German-ACC
‘Is it a Japanese car, or a German one, that you have bought?’
Egy TOYOTÁT vettem.
a Toyota-ACC bought-I
‘It is a Toyota that I have bought.’

Since in (26) only the adjectival modifier of the noun phrase is stressed, some
linguists claim that the focus extends only over the adjective; the rest of the noun
phrase has been pied-piped to Spec,FP.5 If one interprets the term ‘focus’ as ‘nonpresupposed information’, then this might be true. In the terminology adopted in
this book, however, the focus is the value of exhaustive identification performed on
a set of relevant individuals. In the case of (26a) the individuals – one of which the
focus of the yes–no question identifies – are not nationalities but cars (otherwise
the answer given to the question in (26b) would not be adequate). In other words,
the entity representing the value of exhaustive identification is the referent of the
whole noun phrase.
If the value of exhaustive identification is always the referent of the whole
constituent in Spec,FP, then it is not immediately clear why the following sentences
are interpreted differently; after all, they share the same focus, and they are also
identical in other respects.
(27) a.

5

Péternek HÁROM lányt
kellett elszállásolnia.
Peter-DAT three girl-ACC needed put.up-INF-3SG
‘Peter had to put up THREE girls.’

See Kenesei (1998).

88

The syntax of Hungarian
b.

Péternek három LÁNYT kellett elszállásolnia.
‘Peter had to put up three GIRLS.’

c.

Péternek HÁROM LÁNYT kellett elszállásolnia.
‘Peter had to put up THREE GIRLS.’

In fact, each of the three sentences means that, of a set of relevant sets, it was a set
of three girls that Peter had to put up. What the sentences differ in is how the set of
relevant sets is construed. In the case of (27a) the relevant sets from among which
the set of three girls has been identified are sets of girls of different cardinality
(e.g. a set of one girl, a set of two girls, a set of six girls, etc.). In the case of (27b),
the alternatives are three-member sets of individuals (e.g. a set of three men and
a set of three children, in addition to the set of three girls). In the case of (27c)
the context does not give any clue to the identification of the alternative sets. The
stress pattern of focus affects the construal of the set of relevant alternatives in as
much as the destressing of a subconstituent of focus such as három ‘three’ or lányt
‘girl’ indicates that the given subconstituent denotes a presupposed property, more
precisely a property shared by all the alternatives.
Focus movement involves an ill-understood constraint: only head-final constituents can be focussed; namely:
(28)

The Head-finality Constraint
A phrase in Spec,FP must be head-final.6

Owing to the Head-finality Constraint, focussed noun phrases tolerate DP and PP
modifiers only in an adjectivalized, premodifying version (see Section 7.4.):
(29) a. * Számomra [DP A TALÁLKOZÁS PÉTERREL] volt a legemlékezetesebb.
for.me
the meeting
Peter-with was the most.memorable
‘For me, it was the meeting with Peter that was the most memorable.’
b.

Számomra [DP A PÉTERREL VALÓ TALÁLKOZÁS] volt a legemlékezetesebb.
for.me
the Peter-with being meeting
was the most.memorable
‘For me, it was the meeting with Peter that was the most memorable.’

The Head-finality Constraint causes clausal postmodifiers either to be extraposed
or to be left-adjoined to the projection containing them:
(30) a. * Csak [DP AZOK A VEZETŐK, AKIK MÉG SOHA NEM OKOZTAK BALESETET],
only
those the drivers who still never not caused accident-ACC
kapnak dı́jkedvezményt.
get
discount-ACC
‘It is only the drivers who have never caused any accident that get a discount.’
6

It is not clear what the explanation of the constraint is. Kenesei (1994: 330), and Vogel and
Kenesei (1987) derive the prohibition against headless and post-head clauses in Spec,FP
from a prosodic constraint: the focus and the verb following it must form a phonological
phrase, which cannot subsume a clause.

Focussing
b.
c.

89

Csak [DP AZOK A VEZETŐK ti ] kapnak dı́jkedvezményt [CP AKIK MÉG SOHA
NEM OKOZTAK BALESETET]i
Csak [DP AKIK MÉG SOHA NEM OKOZTAK BALESETET, AZOK A VEZETŐK] kapnak
dı́jkedvezményt.

(31) a. * [DP (AZ), HOGY KÖD VOLT], nehezı́tette meg a vezetést.
it that fog was made.difficult VM the driving-ACC
‘It was the fact that there was fog that made driving difficult.’
b.
c.

[DP AZ ti ] nehezı́tette meg a vezetést [CP HOGY KÖD VOLT]i
[DP HOGY KÖD VOLT, AZ] nehezı́tette meg a vezetést.

A question that has gained particular significance in current generative theory
is what motivates focus movement. In the Minimalist framework, in which movement is triggered by the need to check morphological features, identificational
focus moves to Spec,FP to check the [+focus] feature of the F head (see Bródy
1995). Since the VP can contain more than one [+focus]-marked constituent,
but projects at most a single FP,7 it has to be ensured that at least one, and at
most one, of the [+focus] constituents of the clause moves to Spec,FP visibly.
Bródy (1995) achieves this by a Focus Criterion, a generalized version of the
wh-Criterion:
(32) a.
b.

At S-structure and LF the spec of a [+F] XP must contain a [+f] phrase.
At LF all [+f] phrases must be in the spec of a [+F] XP.

In the Government and Binding framework focus movement is motivated by the
need for exhaustive identification to assume scope. This approach is particularly
appealing in the case of Hungarian because in Hungarian scope-bearing elements
c-command their scope from their surface positions. Hence, the word order of the
major sentence constituents can be derived from the scope principle, requiring that
operators c-command their scope, without any stipulations.

4.3

Inherent foci

In the Minimalist framework, a constituent can move to Spec,FP to check
the [+focus] feature of F if it also has a matching [+focus] feature. Certain types of
constituents – among them interrogative phrases, csak ‘only’ phrases, negative existential quantifiers, and negative adverbs of frequency, degree, and manner – obligatorily move to Spec,FP (unless Spec,FP is occupied by another [+focus]-marked
constituent). This is presumably because they have an inherent [+focus] feature
assigned to (a subconstituent of) them even in the lexicon. The [+focus] feature of
7

In fact, É. Kiss (1995a,b) and (1998a) argues for the possibility of projecting more than
one FP per clause. Owing to verb movement to the highest F head, all foci but the highest
one will surface postverbally.

90

The syntax of Hungarian

interrogative phrases and only phrases must be due to the fact that the semantic functions they are associated with represent particular types of exhaustive identification.
Wh-phrases typically request the exhaustive identification of the subset of a relevant set of individuals for which the predicate holds, whereas only phrases combine
exhaustive identification with evaluation (see Sections 4.4 and 4.5); compare:
(33) a. * János [AspP be mutatott kit
Marinak]?
John
VM introduced whom Mary-to
‘Whom did John introduce to Mary?’
b.

János [FP KITi [VP mutatott be ti Marinak]]?

(34) a. * János [AspP be mutatta
csak Pétert
Marinak]
John
VM introduced only Peter-ACC Mary-to
‘John introduced only Peter to Mary.’
b.

János [FP CSAK PÉTERTi [VP mutatta be ti Marinak]]

In the case of negative existential quantifiers, negative adverbs of degree, and
negative adverbs of manner it is less clear what semantic property is responsible
for their inherent [+focus] feature; compare:
(35) a. * János kevés matematikafeladatot [AspP meg oldott]
John few math-problem-ACC
VM solved
‘John solved few math problems.’
b.

János [FP KEVÉS MATEMATIKAFELADATOTi [VP oldott ti meg]]

(36) a. * János alig [AspP meg értette
a matematikafeladatot]
John hardly VM understood the math-problem
‘John hardly understood the math problem.’
b.

János [FP ALIG [VP értette meg a matematikafeladatot]]

(37) a. * János [AspP meg oldja a házi feladatot ritkán]
John
VM solves the home work
seldom
‘John seldom does the homework.’
b.

János [FP RITKÁN [VP oldja meg a házi feladatot]]

(38) a. * János rosszul [AspP meg oldotta a házi feladatot]
John badly
VM solved the home work
‘John did the homework wrong.’
b.

János [FP ROSSZUL [VP oldotta meg a házi feladatot]]

The fact that their [+focus] feature is the manifestation of some semantic property
becomes clear from the case of csúnyán ‘uglily’. Csúnyán must only be focussed
if it means ‘in an ugly manner’. If it is used to express the great degree of some
ugly deed, it is not focussed (but is adjoined to AspP);8 compare:
8

See Kiefer (1967).

Focussing
(39) a.

91

János [FP CSÚNYÁN [VP ı́rta meg a leckét]]
John
uglily
wrote VM the lesson
‘John wrote the lesson in an ugly way.’
compare:

b. * János [AspP csúnyán [AspP meg ı́rta a leckét]]
(40) a.

b.

János [AspP csúnyán [AspP el vágta a kezét]]
John
uglily
VM cut his hand
‘John badly cut his hand.’
Jánost [AspP csúnyán [AspP be csapták]]
John-ACC uglily
VM deceived-they
‘John was badly deceived.’

The [+focus] feature can also be assigned freely, to any argument in the VP. If
the VP contains two or more [+focus]-marked constituents, then only one of them
will move to the Spec,FP; the rest of them remain in the VP. The constituent raised
to Spec,FP will have scope over those left in situ; see (41):
(41) a.

b.

Csak MARI kapott CSAK KÉT TÁRGYBÓL jelest.
only Mary received only two subject-from A+
‘It was only Mary who got an A+ only in two subjects.’
Csak KÉT TÁRGYBÓL kapott CSAK MARI jelest.
‘It was only two subjects in which only Mary got an A+.’

These sentences are not ambiguous; as is clear from the paraphrases, the relative
scope of the two only-phrases depends on their surface c-command relation. This
provides evidence against the LF-movement of the postverbal [+focus]-marked
constituent into Spec,FP predicted by the Focus Criterion of Bródy (1995), quoted
under (32). If it were adjoined invisibly to the phrase occupying Spec,FP, then the
two would have identical scopes (as is the case in English multiple questions).
In fact, the postverbal [+focus]-marked constituent is interpreted scopally in situ.
This must be possible because, the Hungarian VP being flat, it c-commands the
material in the predicate also from its base position.9 This approach predicts that
in a sentence containing two VP-internal focus-marked constituents in addition
to the one in Spec,FP, the VP-internal foci have identical scopes, i.e., they can
be interpreted in any scope order, whatever their linear order should be. This is,
indeed, what we attest:

9

The idea of FP-iteration raised in footnote 7 is motivated by multiple focus constructions
like (41), in which the postverbal focus also occupies a scope position. If the postverbal
focus were in situ, then it would undergo movement to Spec,FP in LF and would end up
adjoined to the focus constituent in Spec,FP. As a result of this, they would have identical

92

The syntax of Hungarian

(42) a. MELYIK FÉLÉVBEN [VP kapott CSAK HÁROM LÁNY CSAK KÉT
which term-in
received only three girl only two
TÁRGYBÓL jelest]?
subject-from A+
‘In which term was it only three girls who received an A+ only in two subjects?’
‘In which term was it only in two subjects that only three girls received an A+?’
b. MELYIK FÉLÉVBEN [VP kapott CSAK KÉT TÁRGYBÓL CSAK HÁROM LÁNY JELEST]?
‘In which term was it only in two subjects that only three girls received an A+?’
‘In which term was it only three girls who received an A+ only in two subjects?’

Example (42) also illustrates that of a wh-phrase and an only-phrase, the former
must be selected for focus movement. This is presumably because a sentence without a wh-phrase in Spec,FP cannot be interpreted as a question; compare also:
(43) a.

KI látta CSAK PÉTERT?
who saw only Peter-ACC
‘Who saw only Peter?’

b. * CSAK PÉTERT látta KI?
scopes and could be interpreted in any scope order. In the theory of É. Kiss (1995a, 1995b,
1998a), FP is an extension of AspP, it can be iterated, and the V is attracted to the highest
F, as follows:
(i)

FP
Spec

F'
FP

F
Spec

F'
F

AspP
Asp'

Spec

VP

Asp

csak Marii

kapottj

csak két tárgybólk

only Mary

got

only two subject-from

tj jelest tj

V

DP

DP …

tj

ti

tk

A+

The V undergoes head movement from V into the higher F head passing through Asp
and the lower F. Since it must be raised to the higher F, the lower focus constituent will
be spelled out in postverbal position. This proposal raises the following problems: first,
as Surányi (2000) pointed out, it makes wrong predictions for cases like (42), containing
three [+focus]-marked constituents. It predicts a fixed scope order for the postverbal
foci, which is contrary to fact. Second, it also wrongly predicts that the second focus
immediately follows the verb. In fact, any number of constituents can intervene between
them.

Focussing

93

Of an inherent focus and a non-inherent focus, the latter must land in Spec,FP
(44a), otherwise its [+focus] feature, which is not salient morphologically, will
not be interpreted (whereas the inherent [+focus] feature of for example an only
phrase or a negative adverb cannot become lost).
(44) a.

MINKET hı́v fel Péter RITKÁN.
us
calls up Peter seldom
‘It is us that Peter calls up seldom.’

b.

RITKÁN hı́v fel minket Péter.
‘It is seldom that Peter calls us up.’

Example (44b) is not ungrammatical, but its minket constituent cannot be assigned
a focus interpretation.

4.4

Only-phrases

4.4.1

The syntax of only

Csak ‘only’-phrases deserve a more detailed examination. Focussing particles like only (similar to additive particles like also and even) are usually analyzed
in the literature as clausal operators generated independently of the focus, and associated with it only in the course of interpretation.10 This approach is somewhat
counter-intuitive for Hungarian native speakers, who share the intuition that csak
is a modifier of the focus constituent, and has undergone focus movement together
with it. This intuition is based partly on the fact that a sentence can contain more
than one csak phrase – see examples (41)–(42) above.
Word order variation in csak sentences also provides some weak support for
this view. The particle csak usually immediately precedes the focus phrase that it
is understood to belong to, qualifying the exhaustive identification expressed by it
(in a way to be specified below):
(45) a.

10

János csak MARINAK mutatta
be Pétert.
John only Mary-to introduced VM Peter-ACC
‘It was only to Mary that John introduced Peter.’

b.

János csak PÉTERT mutatta
be Marinak.
John only Peter-ACC introduced VM Mary-to
‘It was only Peter whom John introduced to Mary.’

c.

János csak EGYSZER találkozott Marival.
John only once
met
Mary-with
‘It was only once that John met Mary.’

d.

János csak HÁROM LÁNYT tud elszállásolni.
John only three girl-ACC can put.up-INF
‘It is only three girls that John can put up.’

Such an analysis has also been proposed by Szabolcsi (1980) for Hungarian.

94

The syntax of Hungarian

Csak can also appear anywhere behind the verb, and still be understood to belong to the focus. The following sentences are merely stylistic variants of those
under (45):
(46) a.

János MARINAK mutatta csak be Pétert.
‘It was only to Mary that John introduced Peter.’

b.

János PÉTERT mutatta be csak Marinak.
‘It was only Peter whom John introduced to Mary.’

c.

János EGYSZER találkozott Marival csak.
‘It is only once that John met Mary.’

d.

János HÁROM LÁNYT tud csak elszállásolni.
‘It is only three girls that John can put up.’

In (46b) a pause between csak and Mary indicates that csak belongs to Peter.
This sentence would also be grammatical if csak modified Mary. (Recall that
if the VP contains two [+focus]-marked constituents, one of them will remain in
situ.) In fact, there can also be two csak particles next to each other (separated by a
slight pause), one of which is a stranded csak belonging to the focussed constituent;
the other one is a csak belonging to the phrase that it immediately precedes:
(47) a.

János PÉTERT mutatta
be csak csak Marinak.
John Peter-ACC introduced VM only only Mary-to
‘As for John, it was only Peter that he introduced only to Mary.’

b.

János PÉTERT mutatta csak be csak Marinak.
‘As for John, it was only Peter that he introduced only to Mary.’

If csak is inserted into the sentence attached to a VP-internal constituent to be focussed, then the examples in (46) and (47) are instances of csak-floating/stranding.
Csak has no fixed position in the VP because the trace to which it is adjoined can
stand anywhere behind the verb.
Csak can also show up in a focusless sentence, left-adjoined to AspP. In such
cases exhaustive identification is performed on a set of alternative actions, and the
value of exhaustive identification is represented by the action denoted by the given
AspP. Since AspP has not undergone any movement, the csak modifying it cannot
have been stranded. Indeed, a csak applying to an AspP cannot stand postverbally;
compare:
(48) a.

[AspP Csak [AspP rá csapta János az ujjára
a kocsiajtót]], más nem
only
on slammed John his finger-on the car-door-ACC else not
történt.
happened
‘John only slammed the car door on his finger, nothing else happened.’

b. * [AspP Rá csapta János csak az ujjára a kocsiajtót], más nem történt.

Focussing

95

Certain types of non-major categories (e.g. numerals and adverbs of degree) can
also be modified by csak, which also argues against the propositional operator
analysis of csak:
(49) a.

b.

A csak 15 éves
gyanúsı́tottat letartóztatták.
the only 15 year-old suspect-ACC arrested-they
‘The only 15-year-old suspect was arrested.’
A csak alig olvasható szöveget sokan próbálták értelmezni.
the only barely readable text-ACC many tried
to.interpret
‘Many tried to interpret the only barely legible text.’

The distribution of csak attested follows most straightforwardly if we assume that
csak can be adjoined to (extended) lexical projections, among them DPs and AspPs.
Csak has a lexical [+focus] feature, which percolates onto the category that csak
modifies. If the constituent modified by csak is available for focus movement, it
will land in Spec,FP. In other cases – e.g. when csak is adjoined to an AspP or
to a subconstituent of a major constituent – its [+focus] feature will result in a
particular interpretation.

4.4.2

The semantics of only

Csak ‘only’ phrases are generally believed to express exhaustive identification, i.e., they are associated with the same logical function that plain foci have
in Hungarian. Indeed, it is hard to tell what the difference between the meanings
of (50a) and (50b) is, if any.
(50) a.

b.

János PÉTERT mutatta
be Marinak.
John Peter-ACC introduced VM Mary-to
‘It was Peter whom John introduced to Mary.’
János CSAK PÉTERT mutatta
be Marinak.
John only Peter-ACC introduced VM Mary-to
‘It was only Peter whom John introduced to Mary.’

Both sentences appear to mean that, of a set of relevant individuals, it holds for
Peter and for no-one else that John introduced him to Mary. However, there are
also contexts in which the focus cannot be accompanied by csak – which could
not happen if sentences with a csak-marked focus and a csak-less focus were truly
synonymous; compare:
(51) a.

János MARIT
szereti a legjobban.
John Mary-ACC loves the best
‘It is Mary whom John loves the best.’

96

The syntax of Hungarian
b. * János CSAK MARIT szereti a legjobban.
‘It is only Mary whom John loves the best.’

(52) a.

JÁNOS érkezett elsőként.
John arrived first
‘It was John who arrived first.’

b. * CSAK JÁNOS érkezett elsőként.
‘It was only John who arrived first.’
(53) a.

Az Európa-bajnokságon
A
FRANCIA CSAPAT nyerte az aranyérmet.
the Europe championship-on the French team won the gold-medal-ACC
‘At the European championship it was the French team that won the gold medal.’

b. * Az Európa-bajnokságon CSAK A FRANCIA CSAPAT nyerte az aranyérmet.
‘At the European championship it was only the French team that won the gold
medal.’

The semantic contribution of csak is most transparent in sentences in which the
elements in the domain of exhaustive identification denote quantities or some other
type of gradable elements; for example:
(54) a.

Az osztálykirándulásra CSAK HÚSZ GYEREK jött el.
the class-excursion-on only twenty child came VM
‘Only twenty children came on the class excursion.’

b.

János CSAK KÖZÉPISKOLÁT végzett.
John only high-school-ACC completed
‘John completed only high school.’

c.

Az előadás
CSAK KILENCKOR kezdődik.
the performance only nine-at
begins
‘The performance begins only at nine.’

In the case of these sentences the operator performing exhaustive identification
operates on a set of alternatives that are ordered along a scale. Csak expresses that
the referent identified as the value of the identificational operator represents a nonmaximal value on the scale of alternatives. Suppose that (54a) is uttered in a situation involving a class of 30 students. The alternatives of which it can be potentially
true that they came on the excursion include a (sub)set of 30 students, a subset of
29 students, a subset of 28 students, etc. If a focus modified by csak indeed represents a non-maximal value on the scale of alternatives, then (55a,b) are possible
sentences in the given situation; (55c), however, is not. This is what we attest:
(55) a.

Az osztálykirándulásra CSAK EGY GYEREK jött el.
the class-excursion-on only one child came VM
‘Only one child came on the class excursion.’

Focussing
b.

97

Az osztálykirándulásra CSAK 29 GYEREK jött el.
‘Only 29 children came on the class excursion.’

c. % Az osztálykirándulásra CSAK 30 GYEREK jött el.
‘Only 30 children came on the class excursion.’

In the case of (54b) the alternatives on which exhaustive identification is performed
include different levels of education, among them university, college, high school,
and elementary school. Again, csak expresses that the alternative identified represents a non-maximal value of this scale. In the case of (54c) the operator of
exhaustive identification operates on a set of points of time. These points of time
form a scale if they are viewed from a reference point, e.g. the point of time of
speaking. Csak in (54c) expresses that the time of the beginning of the performance
identified is not the earliest possible alternative.
The interpretation of csak as an evaluative particle can in fact also be extended
to cases in which it applies to noun phrases referring to non-gradable entities; for
example:
(56)

A családból CSAK JÁNOS ÉS PÉTER vett részt az esküvőn.
the family-from only John and Peter took part the wedding-in
‘From the family only John and Peter took part in the wedding.’

Suppose that the family in question is a family of four members: János, Péter, Éva,
and Mari. Then the subsets of the family that could have taken part in the wedding
include the maximal subset {János, Péter, Éva, Mari}, the 3-member subsets {János,
Péter, Éva}, {Péter, Éva, Mari}, {János, Éva, Mari}, and {János, Péter, Mari}, the
two-member subsets {János, Péter}, {Péter, Éva}, {Éva Mari}, {János, Mari}, {János,
Éva}, {Péter, Mari}, and finally the one-member sets {János}, {Péter}, {Éva}, {Mari}.
The use of csak expresses that the two-member subset identified does not represent
the maximal value on the scale of alternatives. That is, csak in (56) is the same
evaluative particle that we attested in (54a–c). If the alternatives to be evaluated
are not inherently graded, then we form subsets of different cardinality from the
relevant set of alternatives and arrange the different subsets along a scale. Csak
expresses that the subset identified represents a non-maximal value on the scale of
subsets.
The sentences that do not allow the use of csak all include a predicate that
can hold only for a single individual. The predicates John loves x the best, x
arrived first, or x won the gold medal can only be true of a unique x. That is, the
maximal value on the scale of sets with which these predicates can be combined
is a one-member set. However, csak can be used only in case the focus represents
a non-maximal value on the scale of alternatives – that is why (51b), (52b), and
(53b) are ungrammatical.

98

The syntax of Hungarian

4.5

Wh-questions

4.5.1

Simple wh-questions

In Hungarian wh-questions the wh-phrase must move to Spec,FP – presumably owing to the [+focus] feature of its wh-element; compare:
(57) a.

[TopP A huzat [FP MELYIK SZOBA ABLAKAIT
törte be]]?
the draft
which room’s windows-ACC broke in
‘The windows of which room did the draft break?’

b. [FP MELYIK SZOBA ABLAKAIT törte be a huzat]?
c. * Melyik szoba ablakait a huzat [AspP be törte]?

The only exception is miért ‘why’. Miért is ambiguous: it can mean ‘what for’ and
‘why’. Its focus movement is not obligatory only under the latter interpretation;
compare:
(58) a.

[FP MIÉRT nyúlt a baba]?
what-for reached the baby
‘What did the baby reach for?’

b. * [FP Miért [FP A BABA nyúlt]]?
compare:
(59) a.

b.

[FP MIÉRT kapott János dı́jat]?
why received John prize-ACC
‘Why did John receive a prize?’
[FP Miért [FP JÁNOS kapta a dı́jat]]?
‘Why was it John who received the prize?’

Miért ‘why’ as a sentence adverbial does not necessarily act as a variable binding
operator, requesting the exhaustive identification of a subset of a set of presupposed
reasons – that is why its [+focus] feature is not obligatory. When it specifies the
reason for the identification expressed by the focus, it is adjoined to the FP. (In view
of this fact, we must slightly modify the generalization we arrived at in connection
with (42)–(43): for a Hungarian sentence to be interpretable as a wh-question, it
must have a wh-phrase in the checking domain of F.)
The Hungarian pronouns functioning as wh-phrases – e.g. ki ‘who’, mi ‘what’ –
can also occur in positions other than Spec,FP, where they are associated with
functions other than interrogation. They can be relative pronouns, universal quantifiers, and exclamative phrases, among others. The wh-pronoun in (60a), located in
Spec,CP, acts as a relative phrase, whereas the iterated wh-pronoun in (60b), occupying the position of distributive quantifiers, functions as a universal quantifier.
(60) a.

[CP Ki [FP KORÁN kel]], aranyat lel.
who early gets.up gold-ACC finds
‘He who gets up early finds gold. [The early bird catches the worm.]’

Focussing
b.

99

[DistP Ki-ki [AspP haza mehet]]
who-who home go-can
‘Everybody can go home.’

This situation led Horvath (1986a) to claim that for a wh-pronoun to function as
an interrogative operator it must also have the feature [+focus]. Lipták (2000) has
a different account of the varying interpretation of ki and mi. She claims that they
are variable pronouns (like their Chinese and German counterparts), and that their
wh-interpretation results from binding by an interrogative operator, a [+wh] C.
Notice that in Hungarian embedded questions the C position is occupied by the
equivalent of that – hence one and the same subordinator must be assigned either a
[+wh] or a [–wh] feature; or, alternatively, the subordinator and the interrogative
operator must be assigned to distinct CP and ForceP projections; compare:
(61)

János meg kérdezte, [CP hogy [TopP Pétert [FP ki mutatta
be Marinak]]]
John VM asked
that
Peter-ACC who introduced VM Mary-to
‘John asked who introduced Peter to Mary.’

Yes–no questions (whose word order does not differ from that of declarative sentences) do display a visible -e interrogative marker when embedded; however, -e
appears as a suffix attached to the verb. What is more, it is attached to a verb
in situ. The possibility that V-to-C or V-to-F movement has taken place can be
excluded; according to the evidence of the straight VM V order, the predicate of
the embedded clause is of the category AspP; compare:
(62)

Nem tudom, [CP hogy [TopP Pétert [AspP be mutatta-e
valaki Marinak]]]
not know-I
that
Peter-ACC VM introduced-Q someone Mary-to
‘I don’t know if someone has introduced Peter to Mary.’

Since most matrix verbs select either a [+wh] or a [–wh] clausal complement, and
since they only ‘see’ the topmost CP projection of their complement, the -e interrogative element attached to the verb in (62) must be linked to the complementizer
or the force head in some way (presumably via the LF movement of its [+wh]
feature to C or force).

4.5.2

Multiple questions

In Hungarian, multiple questions requiring a singular answer and those
requiring a pair-list answer have different syntactic structures. Multiple questions
triggering a singular answer are rare and highly restricted; nevertheless, they are
discussed first because they are the ‘true’ multiple questions semantically. As is
argued below, multiple questions associated with a pair-list answer involve only
one wh-operator; the rest of wh-phrases function as universal quantifiers in them.
In a ‘true’ double question, one of the wh-phrases occupies Spec,FP and the
other one remains in situ – given that Spec,FP provides room only for a single

100

The syntax of Hungarian

[+focus] constituent; for example:
(63) a.

b.

[FP KI vesz el [VP kit
a regény végén]]?
who marries VM whom the novel’s end-at
‘Who marries whom at the end of the novel?’
[FP KI verekedett [VP kivel]]?
who fought
who-with
‘Who fought with whom?’

The wh-phrase to be raised to Spec,FP can be chosen freely; the Superiority Condition does not favor one wh-phrase over the other. Since the subject, too, is internal
to the VP, all wh-complements are at an equal distance from Spec,FP. The order
of wh-phrases could also just as well be the reverse in (63a,b):
(64) a.

b.

KIT vesz el ki
a regény végén?
whom marries VM who-NOM the novel’s end-at
‘Whom does who marry at the end of the novel?’
KIVEL
verekedett ki(csoda)?
who-with fought
who-NOM
‘With whom fought who?’

(Example (64b) sounds better if the clause-final pronoun is replaced by kicsoda,
its heavier morphological variant.) Interestingly, this type of double question is
only acceptable if the two wh-phrases operate on the same domain. The following
multiple questions, in which the two wh-phrases are unlikely to bind variables in
a shared domain, are ungrammatical:
(65) a. *? KI mondott mit?
who said
what-ACC
‘Who said what?’
b. *? KI érkezett melyik vonattal?
who arrived which train-by
‘Who arrived by which train?’

The motivation for this constraint is unclear. If Lipták (2000) is right, and the two
pronouns are variables bound by one and the same wh-operator in C, then perhaps
(65a,b) violate the bijection principle, which prevents an operator from binding
two variables. Then (64a,b) are perhaps saved by some kind of anaphoric binding
between the two pronouns.
The type of wh-question under discussion does not invite a pair-list answer.
Pair-list answers are triggered by a different type of question, which superficially
also contains multiple wh-phrases. However, only one of them is an interrogative operator in Spec,FP; the others are universal quantifiers sitting in distributive
quantifier positions; for example:

Focussing
(66) a.

b.
(67) a.

b.

101

[DistP Ki [FP MELYIK AJÁNDÉKOT választotta]]?
who which present-ACC chose
‘Who chose which present?’
[DistP Melyik ajándékot [FP KI választotta]]?
[DistP Ki [FP MELYIK VONATTAL érkezett]]?
who which train-by arrived
‘Who arrived by which train?’
[DistP Melyik vonattal [FP KI érkezett]]?

In these questions only the immediately preverbal wh-phrase is located in Spec,FP;
and that is also the only one that acts as an interrogative operator. The wh-phrase
preceding the one in Spec,FP occupies the position of distributive quantifiers (see
Chapter 5); and it also functions as a distributive quantifier. In the case of (66a),
for example, ki ‘who’ is equivalent to mindenki ‘everybody’: it singles out every
member of a relevant set of persons, and links a set of presents to each of them,
requesting the exhaustive identification of the present that the given person chose.
In the case of (66b), on the other hand, melyik ajándékot ‘which present-ACC’ is
interpreted as the universal quantifier ‘each present’; and the sentence asks about
each element of the set of presents who chose it.
Thus, whereas an English double question is ambiguous – allowing either an
answer denoting two individuals or an answer providing a so-called pair-list – in
Hungarian the two meanings are expressed by different structures. The answers to
the following two questions, for example, could not be exchanged; whereas (68a)
must be answered by a single statement involving two individuals, (68b) requires
a family of answers.
(68) a.

János KIT
mutatott be kinek?
John whom introduced VM who-to
‘Whom did John introduce to whom?’

b.

PÉTERT mutatta
be Marinak.
Peter-ACC introduced-he VM Mary-to
‘He introduced Peter to Mary.’

(69) a.

János kit KINEK mutatott be?
‘Whom did John introduce to whom?’

b.

Pétert
MARINAK ÉS ÉVÁNAK, Zoltánt
ÉVÁNAK ÉS JÚLIÁNAK,
Peter-ACC Mary-to and Eve-to, Zoltan-ACC Eve-to and Julie-to,
Istvánt
pedig
JÚLIÁNAK ÉS MARINAK mutatta
be.
Stephen-ACC on the other hand Julie-to and Mary-to introduced-he VM
‘He introduced Peter to Mary and Eve, Zoltan to Eve and Julie, and Stephen to
Julie and Mary.’

102

The syntax of Hungarian

As is also clear from the dialogue in (69), the so-called pair-list answer is not in
fact a list of distinct pairs. The members of a set (the variables in the domain of the
universal quantifier) are linked to possibly overlapping sets of individuals (those
in the domain of the interrogative operator).
It is an interesting question why the content of, for example, (66a) cannot be
expressed by means of a regular universal quantifier followed by an interrogative
pronoun; i.e., by (70):
(70)

Mindenki MELYIK AJÁNDÉKOT választotta?
everybody which present-ACC chose
‘Which present did everybody choose?’

Example (70) is a grammatical question. However, its universal quantifier cannot
be understood distributively; it denotes a set as a single entity. Thus, (70) can only
be asked in a situation in which the speaker knows that everyone chose one and
the same present.11 The reason why the distributive reading is missing, and why a
universal quantifier distributing over an interrogative operator must have the form
of an interrogative operator, is unknown. Perhaps the theory of Lipták (2000), in
which the wh-pronoun is bound by a [+wh] C, will bring us closer to an answer
(it might turn out to be a Relativized Minimality effect; perhaps the intervening
universal quantifier would block the binding relation between C and the constituent
in Spec,FP).
In this type of multiple question the first wh-phrase, acting as a universal quantifier, must be [+specific] (or D-linked), i.e., it must apply to a set of individuals
present in the context or in the domain of discourse.12 It is intuitively clear what
motivates this constraint (called the Specificity Filter in É. Kiss 1993): the interpretation (i.e., the reference) of the wh-pronoun depends on the identity of the
individuals in the domain of the universal quantifier. If the universal quantifier is
not specific enough in the sense that the individuals in its domain cannot be identified, then the wh-phrase cannot be interpreted. The (b) sentences of the following
sentence pairs are ungrammatical, or marginal, because they violate the specificity
filter, i.e., the specificity requirement on the universal quantifier:
11

Whereas mindenki ‘everybody’ in (70) does not distribute, it has wide scope with respect
to exhaustive identification. The sentence in which the universal quantifier has narrow
scope with respect to the identificational focus reads as follows:
(i)

12

Melyik ajándékot választotta mindenki?
everybody
which present-ACC chose
‘Which is the present which everybody chose?’

This specificity requirement is also known from other languages; compare Pesetsky
(1987), Comorovski (1996), É. Kiss (1993).

Focussing
(71) a.

103

Ki MIT
mondott?
who what-ACC said
‘Who said what?’

b. ? Mit
KI mondott?
what-ACC who said
‘What did who say?’
(72) a.

Ki HOGYAN viselkedett?
who how
behaved
‘Who behaved how?’

b. ?* Hogyan KI viselkedett?
how
who behaved
‘How did who behave?’
(73) a.

Ki MIÉRT hazudott?
who why lied
‘Who lied why?’

b. * Miért KI hazudott?
why who lied
‘Why did who lie?’

At first sight, the marginal (b) sentences seem to violate the Superiority Condition.
However, the following acceptable sentences display the same distributions of
grammatical functions; the initial constituents in them have merely been replaced
by their specific (partitive) counterparts, which presuppose the presence of a set
of relevant entities in the domain of discourse:
(74) a.

Melyik mondatot
KI mondta?
which sentence-ACC who said
‘Who said which sentence?’

b.

Melyik módon KI oldotta meg a feladatot?
which way-in who solved VM the problem
‘Who solved the problem in which way?’

c.

Mely okból
KI hazudott?
which reason-for who lied
‘Who lied for which reason?’

The Superiority Condition is also undermined by examples in which the object–
subject order is grammatical, and the subject–object order is marginal – because
the subject is represented by a non-specific wh-phrase; for example:
(75) a.

Kire HÁNY
SZAVAZAT jutott?
who-on how-many votes
fell
‘How many votes fell on whom?’

b. * Hány szavazat KIRE jutott?
‘Whom did how many votes fall on?’

104

The syntax of Hungarian

(76) a.

Mit
ki a fene mondott?
what-ACC who the hell said
‘Who the hell said what?’

b. * Ki a fene mit mondott?
‘What did who the hell say?’13

Hungarian embedded questions also have empirically and theoretically interesting
properties – e.g. they allow partial wh-movement. These properties are discussed
in some detail in Chapter 10.

4.6

Summary

This chapter has examined the syntax and semantics of the preverbal
focus constituent of the Hungarian sentence. It has demonstrated that the focus
serves to exhaustively identify the subset of a set of relevant individuals for which
the predicate holds, while excluding the complementary subset. The focus constituent must be adjacent to the finite verb – with no verb modifier intervening
between them – which is derived by generating the FP projection harboring the
focus constituent immediately above the morphosyntactically extended VP – as
an alternative to AspP. The movement of the focus constituent to Spec,FP is motivated in current theory by the need of the head of FP to have its [+focus] feature
checked. Certain types of constituents – e.g. interrogative pronouns, csak-phrases,
negative existential quantifiers, negative adverbs of frequency, negative adverbs of
degree, and negative adverbs of manner – are moved to Spec,FP obligatorily; this
is attributed to their inherent [+focus] feature.
Csak ‘only’ has been argued to be generated adjoined to a verb complement,
lending its inherent [+focus] feature to it. Csak functions as an evaluating particle
used in the case of exhaustive identification performed on a partially ordered set
of gradable entities. It serves to express that the entity identified by the focus
constituent represents a non-maximal value on the scale of alternatives.
The surface position of the wh-phrase is also in Spec,FP (although the possibility has been raised that it is bound from C). In Hungarian, multiple questions
requesting the identification of two individuals, and multiple questions requesting
a pair-list answer have different structures. The former are subject to a constraint
requiring a shared domain for the two wh-phrases, whereas the latter are subject to
a specificity filter, but the Superiority Condition is applicable to neither of them.

13

This type of example is quoted from den Dikken and Giannakidou (2000).

5

Quantiﬁcation
5.1

Distributive quantiﬁers at the head of the predicate

A characteristic property of Hungarian, shared by few other languages,
is that it has a designated structural position for distributive quantifiers at the head
of the predicate, before the focus (1a,b) or before the verb modifier (2a,b);1 for
example:
(1) a.

b.

[Mindenki [FP JÁNOST hı́vta meg]]
everybody
John-ACC invited VM
‘Everybody invited John. [For everybody, it was John whom he invited.]’
[Mindenkit [FP JÁNOS
hı́vott meg]]
everybody-ACC John-NOM invited VM
‘Everybody was invited by John. [For everybody, it was John who invited him.]’

(2) a.

[TopP Jánost
[mindenki [AspP meg hı́vta]]]
John-ACC everybody-NOM VM invited
‘John, everybody invited.’

b.

[TopP János
[mindenkit [AspP meg hı́vott]]]
John-NOM everybody-ACC VM invited
‘John invited everybody.’

The universal quantifiers in (1)–(2) are clearly inside the predicate phrase. This is
indicated, among other things, by their stress. Whereas the stress of the topic is
usually reduced, these quantifiers bear obligatory stress; they bear the first obligatory stress of the sentence, which marks the first major constituent of the predicate
phrase. Furthermore, if these quantifiers were in topic position, their order relative
to the other topic constituent would be free, which is not true; compare:
(3) a.

1

* [TopP Mindenki [TopP Jánost [AspP meg hı́vta]]]
everybody
John-ACC VM invited

For earlier descriptions of the quantifier position in the Hungarian sentence, see É. Kiss
(1987a, 1991a). The interaction of quantifier position and relative scope was first observed
by Hunyadi (1986). A Q-position similar to that attested in Hungarian has been pointed
out in KiLega (Kinyalolo 1990), Palestinian Arabic (Khalaily 1995), and Chinese (Bartos
2000b).
105

106
b.

The syntax of Hungarian
* [TopP Mindenkit [TopP János [AspP meg hı́vott]]]
everybody-ACC John-NOM VM invited

The boundary between the topic and the predicate is the rightmost possible position
for sentence adverbials. Universal quantifiers cannot precede sentence adverbials,
which is evidence of their predicate-internal position:
(4) a.

b.

* [TopP Jánost
[mindenki
szerencsére [AspP meg hı́vta]]]
John-ACC everybody-NOM luckily
VM invited
‘John, luckily, everybody invited.’
* [TopP János [mindenkit
szerencsére [AspP meg hı́vott]]]
John everybody-ACC luckily
VM invited
‘John, luckily, invited everybody.’

At the same time, a predicate-initial quantifier is clearly not in focus position either.
Whereas a constituent in Spec,FP is followed by a bare V, with the verb modifier
in postverbal position (5), a quantifier is followed by a VM V string (6).
(5) a.

b.

(6)

[FP Csak ÉVA hı́vta meg Jánost]
only Eve invited VM John-ACC
‘It was only Eve who invited John.’
[FP KEVÉS KOLLÉGA hı́vta meg Jánost]
few colleague invited VM John-ACC
‘There were few colleagues who invited John.’
[Minden kolléga [AspP meg hı́vta Jánost]]
every
colleague
VM invited John-ACC
‘Every colleague invited John.’

As is clear from the comparison of (5b) and (6), the predicate-initial quantifier
position is not available for every type of quantifier. Thus, negative existential
quantifiers (the so-called counting quantifiers of Szabolcsi 1997a) – involving for
example kevés ‘few’, legfeljebb n ‘at most n’, pontosan n ‘exactly n’ – are ungrammatical in quantifier position; they must be preposed into Spec,FP (recall that in
Section 4.2.3 they were claimed to have an inherent [+focus] feature). Existential
quantifiers of the type valaki ‘somebody’, valami ‘something’, néhány fiú ‘some
boys’ can appear neither in focus position, nor in quantifier position; they are either
topics, as in (7a) and (8a), or are VP-internal bound variables, as in (7b) and (8b).
(7) a.

b.

(8) a.

szerencsére [AspP meg hı́vta Jánost]]
[TopP Valaki
somebody luckily
VM invited John-ACC
‘Somebody luckily invited John.’
[Minden diákot [AspP meg hı́vott valaki]]
every
student-ACC VM invited somebody-NOM
‘Every student was invited by somebody.’
[TopP Néhány család szerencsére [AspP meg hı́vta Jánost]]
some families luckily
VM invited John-ACC
‘Some families luckily invited John.’

Quantiﬁcation
b.

107

[Minden diákot [AspP meg hı́vott néhány család]]
every
student-ACC VM invited some families
‘Every student was invited by some families.’

Positive existential quantifiers involving sok ‘many’, számos ‘several’, több mint
n ‘more than n’, legalább n ‘at least n’, on the other hand, can appear either in
focus position or in quantifier position:2
(9) a.

[Top Jánost
[sok család [AspP meg hı́vta]]]
John-ACC many family
VM invited
‘John, many families invited.’

b.

[TopP Jánost [FP SOK CSALÁD hı́vta meg]]
‘As for John, it was many families who invited him.’

(10) a.

[TopP Jánost
[számos család [AspP meg hı́vta]]]
VM invited
John-ACC several family
‘John, several families invited.’

b.
(11) a.

b.
(12) a.

b.

[TopP Jánost [FP SZÁMOS CSALÁD hı́vta meg]]
‘As for John, it was several families who invited him.’
[TopP Jánost
[több, mint hat család [AspP meg hı́vta]]]
John-ACC more than six family
VM invited
‘John, more than six families invited.’
[TopP Jánost [FP TÖBB, MINT HAT CSALÁD hı́vta meg]]
‘As for John, it was more than six families that invited him.’
[TopP Jánost
[legalább hat család [AspP meg hı́vta]]]
John-ACC at.least six family
VM invited
‘John, at least six families invited.’
[TopP Jánost [FP LEGALÁBB HAT CSALÁD hı́vta meg]]
‘As for John, it was at least six families that invited him.’

The set of quantifiers that can only occur in quantifier position from among the
preverbal operator slots include universal quantifiers such as mindenki ‘everybody’,
minden fiú ‘every boy’, valamennyi fiú ‘every boy’, mindegyik fiú ‘each boy’,
bármelyik fiú ‘any boy’, az összes fiú ‘all the boys’, mindkét fiú ‘both boys’;
2

Some (or perhaps all) of these positive existential quantifiers can marginally also be
topicalized, in which case they are associated with a referential, partitive interpretation,
i.e., they are understood to refer to specific members of a group of individuals present in
the domain of discourse; for example:
(i)

Sok diákot
/számos diákot
/legalább hat diákot
valószı́nűleg
many student-ACC /several student-ACC /at least six student-ACC probably
el kell utası́tanunk.
VM needs refuse-1PL
‘Many students/several students/at least six students, we will probably need to
refuse.’

108

The syntax of Hungarian

compare:
(13) a.

[TopP Jánost
szerencsére [mindegyik család [AspP meg hı́vta]]]
John-ACC luckily
each
family
VM invited
‘John, luckily each family invited.’

b. * [TopP Jánost [FP MINDEGYIK CSALÁD hı́vta meg]]
c. * [TopP Mindegyik család [TopP Jánost [AspP meg hı́vta]]]

Also, for phrases modified by the additive particles is ‘also’, and még. . .is ‘even’,
the predicate-initial position is the only available operator slot for them (14). It is
not surprising that universal quantifiers and is ‘also’ phrases group together; after
all, also x means ‘every relevant individual plus x’. (Még ‘even’ in még x is adds
an evaluative element to is ‘also’; it expresses that x is an unexpected addition to
the set of relevant individuals.)
(14) a.

[TopP Éva szerencsére [még Jánost is [AspP meg hı́vta ]]]
Eve luckily
even John-ACC also VM invited
‘Eve luckily invited even John.’

b. * [TopP Éva szerencsére [FP (MÉG) JÁNOST IS hı́vta meg]]
c. * [TopP (Még) Jánost is [TopP Éva szerencsére [AspP meg hı́vta]]]

A noun phrase extended by a bare cardinal number behaves like an indefinite: it
can be topicalized, focussed, or stand in postverbal position. However, it can also
be turned into a quantifier to be moved to predicate phrase initial position – if it is
supplied with the particle is; compare:
(15) a.

[TopP Jánost
[három család is [AspP meg hı́vta]]]
John-ACC three family also VM invited
‘John was invited by three families.’

b. * [TopP Jánost [FP HÁROM CSALÁD IS hı́vta meg]]
c. * [TopP Három család is [TopP Jánost [AspP meg hı́vta]]]

Szabolcsi (1997a) calls this type of is scalar, expressing the idea that the given
number is evaluated as many, but its lexical meaning is, in fact, negligible. This type
of is evidently functions as a grammatical formative, causing the numeral phrase
it modifies to land in quantifier position. (Of course, the context can also force a
regular, additive interpretation on it.) In other words, is must be the spelling-out of
the grammatical feature that is responsible for movement to the prefocus operator
position. As the facts in (16), observed by Szabolcsi (1997a), illustrate, this feature
must be lexically assigned at least in some cases. Namely, whereas a quantifier
involving the analytical expression több, mint n ‘more than n’ can land in the
prefocus quantifier position, that involving its synthetic equivalent n-nél több ‘more
than n’ has to be moved to Spec,FP (although judgments are somewhat fuzzy):
(16) a.

[TopP Jánost
[több, mint három család [AspP meg hı́vta]]]
John-ACC more than three family
VM invited
‘John, more than three families invited.’

Quantiﬁcation
b.

109

[TopP Jánost [FP HÁROMNÁL
TÖBB CSALÁD hı́vta meg ]]
John-ACC three-ADESSIVE more family invited VM
‘John, more than three families invited.’

The property that universal quantifiers, is phrases, numeral phrases supplied with
is, and, optionally, phrases involving sok ‘many’, számos ‘several’, etc. share has
been identified by Szabolcsi (1994b, 1997a) as the feature of distributivity. A quantifier raised to the initial position of the predicate phrase acts as a distributor, i.e.,
the content of the rest of the predicate is distributed over every element in its domain. Szabolcsi (1997a) demonstrates the distributivity associated with quantifiers
in the predicate-initial operator position by using examples that force a distributive
reading despite the fact that it contradicts our knowledge about the world:
(17) a.

b.

[Minden/valamennyi/mindegyik fiú [AspP fel emelte a zongorát]]
every
/all
/each
boy
up lifted the piano
‘Every boy/all boys/each boy lifted up the piano.’
[János is [AspP fel emelte a zongorát]]
John also up lifted the piano
‘Also John lifted up the piano.’

These sentences do not allow a reading in which the lifting of the piano was performed by the boys or by some relevant persons plus John collectively. Consider
another of Szabolcsi’s examples, involving a non-distributive predicate:
(18)

[Mindhárom birtok [AspP körül veszi
a kastélyt]]
all-three
estate
VM surrounds the manor
‘All the three estates surround the manor.’

Since surrounding is a collective act that cannot distribute over the three members
of the subject set, the event of surrounding must be distributed over them. That
is, the sentence must be understood in such a way that each of the three estates
surrounds the house separately, i.e., they form concentric circles around the house,
no matter how unlikely this situation may be.
In the case of universals and is phrases, distributivity may be an inherent feature
of the quantifier; however, in the case of számos ‘several’ and sok ‘many’, it
is a function of the predicate-initial position. The following pairs of sentences
differ only in the quantifier versus focus position of their subject. As the English
paraphrases make clear, the distributive reading is obligatory only if the subject is
in quantifier position.
(19) a.

b.

[Sok/számos fiú [AspP fel emelte a zongorát]]
many/several boy
up lifted the piano
‘Many/several boys (each) lifted up the piano.’
[FP SOK/SZÁMOS FIÚ emelte fel a zongorát]
‘It was many/several boys who lifted up the piano.’

A similar semantic difference is attested between a numeral phrase supplied with
is, occupying quantifier position, and a plain numeral phrase moved to focus or

110

The syntax of Hungarian

topic position: the former is obligatorily distributive, whereas the latter also allows
a collective reading.
(20) a.

[Két fiú is [AspP fel emelte a zongorát]]
two boys also up lifted the piano
‘Two boys (each) lifted up the piano.’

b.

[FP KÉT FIÚ emelte fel a zongorát]
‘It was two boys who lifted up the piano.’

Here is a further example, involving a több mint n ‘more than n’ phrase, which can
also occur either in quantifier position or in focus position, and which assumes an
obligatorily distributive reading only in the former case.
(21) a.

[Minden alkalommal [több, mint hat fiú [AspP fel emelte a zongorát]]]
every
time
more than six boy
up lifted the piano
‘Every time more than six boys (each) lifted up the piano.’

b.

[Minden alkalommal [FP TÖBB, MINT HAT FIÚ emelte fel a zongorát]]
every
time
more than six boy lifted up the piano
‘Every time it was more than six boys that lifted up the piano.’

In sum, the prefocus position of the predicate phrase is reserved for distributive
quantifiers. This is the only operator position available for universals and is phrases;
this is presumably because they are inherently distributive. In the case of phrases
involving a positive existential quantifier such as sok or számos, on the other hand,
obligatory distributivity is a function of the given position, which is not the only
structural position available for them.

5.2

The DistP projection

Let us assume that distributive quantifiers occupy the specifier slot of
a DistP projection.3 DistP dominates FP or, in the absence of an FP, AspP. Let
us assume that it is a projection of a Dist head, which attracts a [+distributive]
constituent into Spec,DistP. Universally quantified noun phrases, and noun phrases
modified by (még). . .is are inherently [+distributive]; that is, distributivity is obviously an intrinsic property of the universal determiner mind-, and of is. Sok/számos/
legalább n/több, mint n phrases can be assigned the feature [+distributive] optionally; or perhaps they represent two items in the lexicon: they stand both for a
[+distributive] quantifier and for an indefinite numeral.
The DistP projection differs syntactically from the AspP and FP projections
in that it can have more than one specifier. (It is also conceivable that the whole
DistP projection is iterated – but under the latter assumption multiple negative
3

The term DistP has been adopted from Beghelli and Stowell (1997) and Szabolcsi
(1997a).

Quantiﬁcation

111

universal quantifiers, licensed by a single negative head, are harder to account for;
see Section 6.5.); compare:
(22) a.

b.

János [DistP mindig [DistP mindenhová [DistP mindkét fiát
[AspP magával
John
always
everywhere
all-two son-3SG-ACC with.him
viszi]]]]
takes
‘John always takes both of his sons with him everywhere.’
János [DistP minden diákjának [DistP három dolgozattémát is [AspP fel
John
every student-3SG-DAT three essay-topic-ACC even VM
ajánlott]]]
offered
‘John offered to each of his students three essay topics.’

In the framework of the Government and Binding theory, the possibility of several distributive quantifiers in a clause follows from the adjunction analysis of
Quantifier-Raising, adjunction being an iterable operation. In view of the results of Szabolcsi (1997a), Beghelli and Stowell (1997), and others, however,
the Quantifier-Raising transformation of May (1985), applying to quantifiers indiscriminately, is not tenable any more – although it could be reformulated as
distributor-raising. In the Minimalist framework, quantifier movement is substitution into Spec,DistP, triggered by the need of the Dist head to have its [+distributive]
feature checked.
Movement to Spec,DistP creates scope; hence, sentences containing two quantifiers, derived by two applications of quantifier movement, are disambiguated.
Thus, the following sentences have only one reading each; the quantifier which
c-commands and precedes the other also has scope over it.
(23) a.

[TopP János [DistP minden diákjának [DistP három dolgozattémát is [AspP fel
John
every student-3SG-DAT three essay-topic
even VM
ajánlott]]]]
offered
‘John offered to each of his students three essay topics.’

b.

[TopP János [DistP három dolgozattémát is [DistP minden diákjának [AspP fel
John
three essay-topic
even every student-3SG-DAT VM
ajánlott]]]]
offered
‘John offered three essay topics to each of his students.’

A [+distributive] quantifier can be raised into the specifier of the DistP of a matrix
clause, as well, in which case it assumes scope over the matrix VP and matrix focus:
(24) a.

A professzorj [DistP mindkét diákoti [FP MÁMAk szeretném, [CP ha
the professor
all.two student-ACC today like-COND-1SG if
levizsgáztatná tj ti tk ]]]
examined
‘As for the professor, it is today that I would like him to examine both students.’

112

The syntax of Hungarian
b.

A professzorj [DistP mindenkiti [AspP átk
kellene,
[CP hogy
the professor
everybody-ACC through need-COND-3SG that
engedjen tj ti tk ]]]
let
‘It would be necessary that the professor let everybody pass.’

Since quantifier raising takes place in visible syntax in Hungarian, a quantifier in
Spec,DistP is expected to license a parasitic gap:4
(25) a.

A professzor [DistP tı́z diákot
isi [AspP át
engedett ti , [PP anélkül,
the professor
ten student-ACC also
through let
without.it
[CP hogy alaposan kikérdezett volna tp ]]]]
that thoroughly asked
had
‘The professor let ten students pass without examining [them] thoroughly.’

b.

János [DistP minden ételmaradékoti [AspP ki dobott ti , [PP anélkül, [CP hogy
John
every leftover-ACC
out threw
without.it that
megkóstolt volna tp ]]]]
tasted
had
‘John threw out all leftovers without tasting [them].’

By way of summary, observe the tree diagram of the structure assigned to (23a):
TopP

(26)
Spec

Top'
Top

DistP
DistP

Spec

Dist'

Spec
Dist

AspP
Asp'

Spec
Asp

VP

V XP XP XP XP
Jánosi minden diákjánakj
John

három témát isk

fel1

ajánlottm

every student-his-DAT three topic-ACC

VM

offered

tm

ti

tj

tk

tl

This is the structure of a predicate containing both a distributive quantifier and a
focus:
4

For a detailed discussion of the Hungarian parasitic gap construction, see Section 10.6.

113

Quantiﬁcation
TopP

(27)
Spec

Top'
Top

Distp
Spec

Dist'
FP

Dist

F'

Spec
F

VP
V

XP XP XP XP

Jánosi

mindegyik gyerekétj

a jogi karrak

John

each child-his-ACC

in Law School enrolled VM

íratta

be

ti

tj

tk

On the basis of their structures, the stress patterns of these sentences can also be
predicted. In Hungarian, the Nuclear Stress Rule puts phrasal stress on the left edge
of phrases.5 The topic of the sentence – i.e., the constituent in Spec,Top – constitutes
an independent intonation phrase, which is usually subject to stress reduction.6 In
the intonation phrase represented by the predicate (i.e., in the complement of Top),
each maximal projection is assigned phrasal stress. Since phrasal stress falls on the
left edge, in (26) the VM and the two quantifiers will be stressed, whereas in (27)
the quantifier and the focus will be stressed. As follows from the Nuclear Stress
Rule, the higher a projection, the heavier its stress will be. The stress assigned to
the initial V of a VP immediately dominated by an FP is obligatorily deleted –
perhaps because a post-focus V necessarily carries presupposed information.

5.3

The scope principle

5.3.1

Preverbal quantifiers

In the generative framework, operators are assumed to be subject to the
following constraint:
(28)

The scope principle
An operator c-commands its scope.

English and other languages often contradict this principle on the surface; various mechanisms have, therefore, been proposed to map the structures attested
5
6

On the Nuclear Stress Rule in Hungarian, see É. Kiss (1988), and Varga (1999).
See Hunyadi (1997, 1999), who outlines a Hungarian metrical phonology (based on
phonetic evidence recorded in the form of sonograms). Incidentally, in his system, scope is
primarily expressed by stress; an operator has scope over the elements in the phonological
phrase of which it is the head.

114

The syntax of Hungarian

on structures in which the scope of operators corresponds to their c-command
domain. In the Government and Binding framework operators were assumed to
satisfy the scope principle in LF, after invisible quantifier raising. More recently
it has been claimed that operators satisfy the scope principle at an early stage of
the derivation, but subsequent transformations may superficially cover the correspondence between their scope and c-command domain. From the point of view of
the scope principle, Hungarian is the ‘best-behaving’ language of those described
in the generative framework: it observes the scope principle trivially, in visible
syntax, at surface structure.
In the preverbal operator field of the predicate the scope principle is trivially satisfied: every operator has scope over the constituent it c-commands and precedes.
That is, sentences are fully disambiguated; scope relations can be identified both
on the basis of c-command and on the basis of surface order. This fact has already
been illustrated in the case of a pair of quantifiers: in (23a,b) the reversal of the
order of quantifiers results in a reversal of their relative scope.
If one of the theoretically possible scope orders of two quantifiers yields a
reading that is pragmatically impossible, the linear order corresponding to the
pragmatically impossible order will be unacceptable; for example:
(29) a.

Mindenki minden almát
meg evett.
everybody every apple-ACC up ate
‘Everybody ate up every apple.’

b. * Minden almát mindenki meg evett.
c.

Minden almát
mindenki meg vizsgált.
every apple-ACC everybody VM examined
‘Everybody examined every apple.’

The wide scope of minden almát ‘every apple’ in (29b) means that every one of
a relevant set of apples was eaten up by every one of a set of persons – which
is impossible, given that an apple can only be eaten up once. Example (29a), on
the other hand, is grammatical because every person in the domain of mindenki
‘everybody’ can have a different set of apples at his or her disposal, which he or
she might as well eat up. If we replace the verb megeszik ‘eat up’ with megvizsgál
‘examine’, as in (29c), the uniqueness restriction is lifted, and the order ‘universally
quantified object – universally quantified subject’ becomes acceptable.
Consider also the scope relation of a distributive quantifier in Spec,DistP and a
negative existential quantifier (a so-called counting quantifier in the terminology
of Szabolcsi 1997a) in Spec,FP:
(30)

7

[DistP Mindkét süteményt [FP KEVÉS GYEREK kóstolta meg]]7
all-two cake-ACC
few child tasted VM
‘For both cakes, it was few children that tasted them.’

Szabolcsi (1994b, 1997a) claims that kevés gyerek ‘few children’ and similar counting
quantifiers are in Spec,AspP (which she calls Spec,PredOp), instead of Spec,FP. Her claim

Quantiﬁcation

115

As is clear from the English paraphrase, the focussed quantifier is unambiguously
in the scope of the universal quantifier c-commanding it.

5.3.2

Postverbal unstressed quantifiers

The question arises of what happens if the intended scope relation between
a universal quantifier and a focussed quantifier is just the opposite of that illustrated
in (30). How could a counting quantifier have scope over a universal when both
a counting quantifier marked as [+focus] and a universal quantifier marked as
[+distributive] have designated landing sites in the preverbal operator field, and the
landing site of the latter c-commands the landing site of the former? The answer is
that the narrow scope universal must remain in postverbal position; for example:
(31)

[FP KEVÉS GYEREKi [VP kóstolta meg ti mindkét süteményt]]
few child
tasted VM all.two cake
‘It was few children who tasted both cakes.’

The question of whether the postverbal universal quantifier is in its base-generated
position, or occupies a postverbal operator slot, and whether it takes scope in
situ, or is subject to LF movement, has initiated much discussion. É. Kiss (1987a,
1991a) discarded the possibility of the quantifier sitting in a postverbal operator
position because the quantifier has no fixed position in the VP, and its word order
and scope relative to other postverbal operators is also free; compare:
(32) a.

TAVALY olvasott el minden diák két könyvet is a szintaxis-vizsgára.
last.year read
VM every student two book
also the syntax-exam-for
‘It was last year that every student read two books for the syntax exam.’

is based on two considerations. First, a sentence like
(i)
KEVÉS FIÚ ette meg az ebédet.
few boy ate up the lunch
‘(It was) few boys who ate the lunch.’
does not exclude the possibility that any number of girls also ate the lunch, i.e., the
quantifier does not seem to be associated with the exhaustivity characteristic of focussed
constituents. As I argued in Chapter 4, however, in such a case the alternatives on which
exhaustive identification is performed are various subsets of the set of boys present in the
domain of discourse. That is, what are excluded in the case of (i) are sets of boys of a
cardinality other than ‘few’ – e.g. a set of many boys; a set of all boys, etc. Girls are not
among the relevant individuals considered.
Szabolcsi claims that there is another test for deciding whether a constituent occupies
Spec,FP or Spec,PredOp: in negated focussed sentences the negative particle is followed by
the focus, whereas in negated sentences containing a predicate operator/aspectualizer, the
negative particle is followed by the verb. This test also shows kevés fiút to be in Spec,FP;
compare:
(ii)
Nem kevés fiú ette meg az ebédet.
not few boy ate up the lunch
‘It wasn’t few boys who ate the lunch.’
(iii) ?? Nem ette meg kevés fiú az ebédet.

116

The syntax of Hungarian
b.
c.
d.

TAVALY olvasott el két könyvet is minden diák a szintaxis-vizsgára.
TAVALY olvasott el minden diák a szintaxis-vizsgára két könyvet is.
TAVALY olvasott el a szintaxis-vizsgára két könyvet is minden diák.

According to the evidence of these examples, if a sentence contains two narrow
scope quantifiers, then they can appear anywhere behind the verb, which is typical
of VP-internal arguments in Hungarian. Operators have fixed positions in the
Hungarian sentence. Furthermore, the relative order of the quantifiers does not
affect their scope interpretation; each of these sentences is ambiguous (although
the scope order that corresponds to the linear order of the quantifiers is slightly
preferred in every case). É. Kiss (1987a, 1991a) concludes on the basis of these
facts that postverbal quantifiers are in their base-generated positions, and they take
scope in situ. The Hungarian VP being flat, they mutually c-command each other,
which means that they have identical scopes, i.e., they can be interpreted in any
scope order. At the same time, they are in the scope of all preverbal operators.8
8

Szabolcsi (1997a) observed that in the postverbal domain a counting quantifier sometimes
cannot have wide scope over a universal quantifier preceding it. Observe her example:
(i)
TEGNAP harapott meg minden kutya KEVÉS FIÚT.
yesterday bit
VM every dog few boy
‘It was yesterday that every dog bit few boys.’
compare:
(ii)

TEGNAP harapott meg KEVÉS FIÚT minden kutya.
‘It was yesterday that few boys were bitten by every dog.’
‘It was yesterday that every dog bit few boys.’
Whereas (ii) is scopally ambiguous, as expected, in the case of (i) it is difficult, or impossible, to obtain the reading in which it holds for few boys that each of them was bitten by
every dog. Szabolcsi (1997a) derives this fact from a Hungarian sentence structure that
has two sets of operator positions: a set above AgrP, preceding the finite verb, and a set
below AgrP, following the finite verb. The relevant section of the lower set of operator
positions looks as follows:

CaseP*

(iii)

DistP*

Spec
Spec

VP

A postverbal universal quantifier occupies Spec,DistP. A postverbal counting quantifier
preceding it is in a Spec,CaseP, where it takes scope over the constituent in Spec,DistP.
Otherwise it is reconstructed into the VP for interpretation and has narrow scope with
respect to the universal quantifier. A counting quantifier following a postverbal universal
is in the VP. A constituent in Spec,DistP cannot be reconstructed into the VP, hence it
always takes scope over a counting quantifier following it.
The facts, however, are not quite as clear as would appear from the examples in (i) and
(ii). First, we do not get the same effect with every type of distributive quantifiers; e.g. if

Quantiﬁcation

117

A postverbal universal quantifier is also predicted to be scopally ambiguous
with respect to a postverbal counting quantifier. The prediction is borne out:
(33)

TAVALY bukott meg minden tárgyból
KEVÉS DIÁKUNK.
last.year failed VM every subject-from few student-our
‘It was last year that few of our students failed in every subject.’
‘It was last year that in every subject few of our students failed.’

The in situ analysis of postverbal quantifiers raises the question of whether postverbal universal quantifiers also have a [+distributive] feature to check. Beghelli and
Stowell (1997) claim that in sentences containing a universal in the scope of negation, the VP-internal narrow-scope universal quantifier is non-distributive; it is
simply a variable bound by the wide-scope operator. However, we can construct
examples in which a postverbal universal quantifier in the scope of focus distributes
over another postverbal quantifier; for example:
(34)

KEVÉS GYEREK adott mindkét süteményből mindegyik felnőttnek.
few child gave all.two cake-from every
adult-to
‘It was few children who gave some from both cakes to every adult.’

What is more, the predicate is also always distributed over a postverbal narrowscope universal quantifier:
we replace minden kutya ‘every dog’ with minden kutyánk ‘every dog of ours’, inverse
scope is not impossible; compare:
(iv)

TEGNAP harapott meg minden kutyánk KEVÉS FIÚT.
yesterday bit
VM every dog-1PL few boy
‘It was yesterday that every dog of ours bit few boys.’
‘It was yesterday that few boys were bitten by every dog of ours.’

(v)

TEGNAP harapott meg mindkét kutya KEVÉS FIÚT.
yesterday bit
VM all-two dog few boy
‘It was yesterday that both dogs bit few boys.’
‘It was yesterday that few boys were bitten by both dogs.’

The relevant difference between minden kutya ‘every dog’, on the one hand, and minden
kutyánk ‘every dog of ours’ and mindkét kutya ‘both dogs’, on the other hand, is that the
latter quantifiers denote D(iscourse)-linked, or specific, sets. The sentence in (33) evokes
a classroom situation involving a specific set of students and a specific set of subjects.
The relevant generalization is as follows:
(vi)

The inverse scope constraint
Inverse scope between two quantifiers in situ is impossible if the quantifier that
is first in linear order is not D(iscourse)-linked.

(A different generalization also requires the second, wide-scope quantifier to be Dlinked/specific; the specificity of the wide scope operator is a condition of grammaticality
or interpretability in all sentences involving two operators – whether their order is straight
or reverse; compare É. Kiss 1993.) I conclude that the scope difference between (i) and
(ii) is not structurally based. The inverse scope reading of (i) is blocked because it would
violate the semantically or perceptually motivated constraint in (vi).

118

The syntax of Hungarian

(35)

RITKÁN emelte fel minden fiú a zongorát.
rarely lifted up every boy the piano
‘Rarely did every boy lift up the piano.’

Lifting the piano is also a separate act for the boys in the case of (35). In view of
this, a universal quantifier always has a [+distributive] feature, whether preverbal
or postverbal. So we have to conclude that the [+distributive] feature of quantified
phrases is interpretable, hence need not be checked.
If – in a Greed-type framework (see Chomsky 1995: Chapter 3) – we hypothesize
something like a Distributive Criterion, requiring that a [+distributive] feature
always be checked in Spec,DistP, then we can maintain that the scope principle
is observed in overt syntax in Hungarian only at the cost of assuming a recursion
of operator projections, as in É. Kiss (1995a, 1995b, 1998a). In that proposal an
operator surfaces postverbally if a higher F(ocus) head attracts the V across it into
a higher F position; for example:
(36)

DistP
Dist'

Spec
Dist

FP
Spec

F'
F

DistP
Dist'

Spec

FP

Dist
Spec

F'
VP

F
V
Vi

minden

fiú

every

boy

ti

ti

In this framework postverbal inverse scope can be derived by remnant movement
into a specifier position within the postverbal domain.

Quantiﬁcation

5.3.3

119

Postverbal stressed quantifiers

Whereas the facts of Hungarian surveyed so far support, or at least
do not contradict, the claim that the scope principle is observed at S-structure/
spell-out, there is a genuine, systematic exception to this generalization. Namely,
a [+distributive] quantifier need not be preposed into Spec,DistP to assume scope
over FP; a postverbal stressed quantifier can also take scope over FP from inside
the VP; for example:
KEVÉS GYEREK evett  mindkét süteményből.
few child ate both
cake-from
‘For both cakes, few children ate from them.’

(37)

The universal quantifier in (37) unambiguously takes scope over the counting
quantifier in Spec,FP, i.e., (37) is equivalent to (38), in which the universal quantifier
occupies Spec,DistP:
(38)

[DistP Mindkét süteményből [FP KEVÉS GYEREK evett]]

On the other hand, (38) is different in meaning from (39), in which the same
postverbal universal quantifier is unstressed, and has narrow scope:
(39)

KEVÉS GYEREK evett mindkét süteményből.
few child ate both
cake-from
‘Few children ate from both cakes.’

The postverbal stressed universal quantifier can also co-occur with a preverbal
universal quantifier occupying Spec,DistP:
[DistP Mindenkinek [FP KÉTSZER kellett vizsgáznia  több tárgyból is]]
everybody-DAT twice
needed to.take.exam several subject-from
‘Everybody had to sit for an exam twice in several subjects.’

(40)

The universal quantifier több tárgyból is ‘from several subjects’ has wide scope
with respect to kétszer ‘twice’. Its scope relation to mindenkinek ‘everybody’, on
the other hand, is ambiguous; either of them can take scope over the other. That
is, (40) has two readings, which are equivalent to (41a) and (41b):
(41) a.

[DistP Mindenkinek [DistP több tárgyból is [FP KÉTSZER kellett vizsgáznia]]]
‘Everybody had to sit for an exam in several subjects twice.’

b.

[DistP Több tárgyból is [DistP mindenkinek [FP KÉTSZER kellett vizsgáznia]]]
‘In several subjects, everybody had to sit for an exam twice.’

Both readings of (40) are different from that of (42), in which the same postverbal
universal quantifier is unstressed, and has narrow scope with respect to both the
preverbal quantifier and the focus:
(42)

[DistP Mindenkinek [FP KÉTSZER kellett vizsgáznia több tárgyból is]]
‘For everybody, it was on two occasions that he had to sit for an exam in several
subjects.’

120

The syntax of Hungarian

The position of the postverbal stressed quantifier is not fixed within the VP; compare:
(43) a.

b.

JÁNOS vizsgáztatott  mindenkit szintaxisból.
John examined everybody from-syntax
‘For everybody, it was John who examined him in syntax.’
JÁNOS vizsgáztatott szintaxisból  mindenkit.

The number of postverbal stressed quantifiers is not limited to one, and both their
word order and their scope order is free. Thus, the following word order variants
are all equally grammatical and equally ambiguous:
(44) a.

b.
c.
d.
e.
f.


János el vitte vacsorázni  mindkét barátnőjét
többször is.
John VM took to.dine.out both
girl-friend-his-ACC several.times
‘John took both of his girl friends to dinner several times.’
‘On several occasions, John took both of his girl friends to dinner.’

János el vitte  mindkét barátnőjét  többször is vacsorázni.
János el vitte  többször is  mindkét barátnőjét vacsorázni.
János el vitte  mindkét barátnőjét vacsorázni  többször is.
János el vitte  többször is vacsorázni  mindkét barátnőjét.
János el vitte vacsorázni  többször is  mindkét barátnőjét.

Whereas the descriptive facts are clear, they are hard to account for in a systematic
way. They provide no evidence for a postverbal hierarchy of operator positions.
If the operators were right-adjoined to the VP or FP, as in (45a), then their scope
order would be the opposite of their linear order. If they were occupying specifier
positions of functional projections below FP, which happen to surface postverbally
because the V has been preposed across them into a higher functional head, as in
(45b), then their scope order would be identical with their linear order.
FP

(45) a.

FP
FP
Spec

QP2
QP1

Spec

F'
F

F'
F

FP

b.

DistP
Spec

VP
V

Dist'
Dist

DistP
Spec

…

Dist'
Dist

VP
V

Vi QP1

QP2

ti

Quantiﬁcation

121

In an early attempt to account for the prosody and interpretation of postverbal
stressed quantifiers, É. Kiss (1987a, 1991a) suggested that they occupy the regular
prefocus quantifier position at S-structure. The postposing of the quantifier is a
Phonetic Form (PF) phenomenon, the result of a stylistic rule (ordered after stress
assignment – that is why the postverbal quantifier bears the primary stress assigned
to constituents in Spec,DistP). That is, (46a) is derived from (46b):
(46) a.

b.

[AspP Le vizsgázott  mindenki]
VM passed
everybody
‘Everybody passed.’
[DistP Mindenki [AspP le vizsgázott]]

Since the quantifier postposing rule yielding (46a) takes place on the PF branch of
the derivation, it does not affect scope interpretation.
The proposed rule is not unprecedented: PF extraposition of this type is applied
quite extensively also in Chomsky (1999). The rule also has independent motivation in Hungarian. Sentence adverbials, which are generated outside the predicate
phrase and are ungrammatical in the operator domain of the predicate, can also
occur – somewhat markedly – inside the VP; compare:
(47)

? A professzor mindenkit
át
engedett szerencsére szintaxisból.
the professor everybody-ACC through let
luckily
syntax-from
‘The professor luckily let everybody pass in syntax.’

The stylistic rule assumed could be formulated as follows:
(48)

Stylistic Postposing
In the phonological component constituents preceding the main assertion can be
postposed into the VP.

(Although the notion of ‘main assertion’ is a semantic–pragmatic notion, it can
also be interpreted in phonological terms: it is the rightmost obligatorily stressed
element of the predicate phrase: the prefixed verb or, in the presence of a focus,
the focussed element.)
The possibility that a postverbal wide-scope quantifier is in argument position,
and will be preposed into Spec,DistP at LF (logical form) after spell-out, must
be discarded because then there is no way to predict the difference between an
unstressed postverbal quantifier having narrow scope with respect to the focus and
a stressed postverbal quantifier, taking scope from Spec,DistP.
In an alternative approach, Hunyadi (1997a, 1997b) attempts to derive scope
from the surface order and the stress relations of operators. He claims that the
stress-bearing head of an intonational phrase has wide scope over the rest of the
operators in the same intonational phrase. If a postverbal unstressed operator is
in the intonational phrase of the focus, then it is predicted to have narrow scope

122

The syntax of Hungarian

with respect to the focus. A postverbal stressed operator, on the other hand, starts
a new intonational phrase, hence it is not subordinated to the previous operators;
their relative scope is determined by a hierarchy of operators stipulated, in which
sentence operators outrank universal quantifiers and universal quantifiers outrank
the focus. The relative scope of operators of equal ranking is free – hence a stressed
postverbal universal quantifier is predicted to have scope over the focus and to be
scopally ambiguous with respect to another stressed universal quantifier. Hunyadi’s
theory has an intuitive appeal and appears to cover a large number of facts across
languages, but in its present form it leaves many questions unanswered (e.g. how
syntactic structure interacts with prosody in determining scope or what the source
of the hierarchy of operators is).
Bródy and Szabolcsi (2000) propose an analysis of postverbal quantifiers in
the framework of Bródy’s Mirror theory (2000). They assume, following Hallman
(1998), that each of AgrS, T, AgrO, and v come with their own ‘scope series’
[operator projections] in overt syntax. Hence, postverbal quantifiers also occupy
Spec,DistP and Spec,FP positions. When we attest inverted scope in the postverbal
field – e.g. Q2 has scope over a preceding Q1 – then Q2 is in a higher scope series
than Q1. This is possible because in the Mirror theory of Bródy (2000) a specifier
can not only precede a head but can also follow it. It follows the head if the head is a
morphological head – i.e., a suffix – and precedes it otherwise. Thus, the V Q1 Q2
order arises with Q2 having scope over Q1 if Q2 is a specifier of a morphological
Dist head, and Q1 is embedded in the complement of Dist. Preverbal quantifiers
occur in a fixed order because there is only one Top*–Dist*–F series above AgrS.
In this framework, the stress of a postverbal quantifier obviously indicates that the
quantifier belongs to a higher scope series. The coverage of this theory roughly
corresponds to that of the ‘Stylistic Postposing’ approach – but it accounts for the
same set of data with a considerably more complex syntactic machinery.

5.3.4

Quantifiers in topic position

Universal quantifiers (as well as counting quantifiers) can also be topicalized – if they are pronounced with a contrastive, rising intonation (marked by
the symbol /). A predicate-external quantifier pronounced with a rising intonation
always appears to have narrow scope with respect to some operator in the preverbal
operator field of the predicate phrase – in apparent violation of the scope principle;
for example:
(49) a.

[TopP /Minden könyvet [FP csak KETTEN olvastak el a vizsgára]]
every book-ACC only two
read
VM the exam-for
‘All the books were read only by two persons for the exam.’

Quantiﬁcation
b.

[TopP /Egynél
több könyvet [FP KEVESEN olvastak el a vizsgára]]
one-ADESSIVE more book-ACC few
read
VM the exam-for
‘More than one book was read by few persons for the exam.’

c.

[TopP /Kevés hallgatónak [NegP nem tartok órát]]
few student-DAT
not hold-I class-ACC
‘For few students, I do not hold a class.’

123

These sentences are generally believed to be scopally equivalent to the following
sentences, containing a VP-internal unstressed narrow scope quantifier:
(50) a.

[FP Csak KETTEN olvastak el minden könyvet a vizsgára]
‘Only two persons read all the books for the exam.’

b.

[FP KEVESEN olvastak el egynél több könyvet a vizsgára]
‘Only few persons read more than one book for the exam.’

c.

[NegP Nem tartok órát kevés hallgatónak]
‘I do not hold a class for few students.’

The sentences in (49) are problematic not only because their initial quantifiers do
not appear to c-command their scope – in violation of the scope principle – but
also because they do not seem to observe the restriction that requires topics to be
[+referential] and [+specific].
As was argued in Section 2.7, the contrastive topicalization of a quantified noun
phrase does not in fact violate any of these restrictions. The contrasting of a nonindividual-denoting expression is a means of individuating it, i.e., presenting it as
the name of a distinct property. Quantifiers individuated by contrast function as the
names of cardinality properties of sets. In (49a) the property ‘maximal set of books’
is implicitly contrasted with the property ‘non-maximal set of books’. As the name
of a property, the expression minden könyvet ‘every book’ is a legitimate target
of topicalization. In Spec,TopP it functions as the logical subject of predication;
it is predicated of it that only two persons read a representative of it. (About
the alternative property ‘non-maximal set of books’, an alternative statement is
implied: not only two persons read a representative of it.) In (49b) the property
egynél több könyvet ‘set of books of at least two members’ is predicated about; it
is predicated about it that few persons read a representative of it for the exam. In
(49c) the property ‘set of students of few members’ is set into an implicit contrast
with the property ‘set of students of many members’; it is stated about it that the
speaker does not hold a class for a representative of it.
In each of these sentences the quantifier functions as the name of a property and,
as such, it is outside the scope of all operators; in some sense it has maximally
wide scope. It nevertheless gives the impression of a narrow scope quantifier because whatever is predicated about a property is evaluated with respect to concrete

124

The syntax of Hungarian

representatives of the property, which can be referentially different. This referential variability is superficially similar to that attested in the case of narrow scope
quantifiers.

5.3.5

Noun phrase internal quantifiers

An area where the scope principle is not observed in the visible syntax of
various languages is noun phrase internal quantification. The inverse scope attested
in English noun phrases like that in (51) has had a significant role in the emergence
of the theory assuming invisible quantifier movement at LF:
(51)

Every entrance to several large downtown stores was smashed in the riot.

In Hungarian, where the scope principle is observed at S-structure, a quantifier in
the complement of a noun is not expected to have wider scope than the quantified
head. Indeed, the Hungarian equivalent of (51) is ungrammatical (although the
structure itself, with the quantifiers removed, is acceptable):
(52) a. * [Minden bejárat több nagy boltba] megrongálódott a zavargások alatt.
every
entrance several large store-to was.damaged the riots
during
‘Every entrance to several large stores was damaged during the riots.’
compare:
b.

[A bejárat a boltba] megrongálódott a zavargások alatt.
the entrance the store-to was.damaged the riots
during
‘The entrance to the store was damaged during the riots.’

The intended scope order of the two quantifiers in (52a) can be expressed by
placing the wider scope quantifier into the position of the genitive specifier, where
it c-commands the whole noun phrase:
(53)

Több nagy bolt minden bejárata megrongálódott.
several large store’s every entrance was.damaged
‘Every entrance of several large stores was damaged.’

A noun phrase internal operator can take sentential scope presumably because the
operator feature percolates up to the maximal noun phrase projection. The operator
feature of a prehead specifier or modifier can percolate up across several cycles,
causing the matrix noun phrase to land in the specifier of a functional projection with a matching feature, from where it c-commands the predicate. Observe
how deeply the wh-pronoun is embedded in the focus-moved noun phrases of the
following sentences:

Quantiﬁcation
(54) a.

b.

125

[FP [MELYIK ZENESZERZÓ´ HARMADIK SZIMFÓNIÁJÁNAK 2. TÉTELÉBEN]
which composer’s third
symphony’s
2. movement-in
található
ez a motı́vum]?
can.be.found this motif
‘In the 2nd movement of which composer’s third symphony can this motif be
found?’
[FP [JÁNOS KINEK ÍROTT LEVELÉT] fogta el a rendőrség]?
John’s who-DAT written letter-ACC seized VM the police
‘John’s letter written to whom did the police seize?’

(If we adopt Kayne’s antisymmetry of syntax approach, we can ensure clausal
domain for the wh-operator in (54a,b) even without assuming feature percolation.
Kayne (1994) analyzes specifiers as adjoined phrases, and he defines c-command
in such a way that the specifier of the specifier of a phrase does asymmetrically
c-command the given phrase.)
The question arises as to what happens if a noun phrase has two quantifiers to
take sentential scope. In the case of (53) the quantifier of the head and the quantifier
of the genitive specifier have matching features: the universal quantifier is intrinsically [+distributive], and the quantifier több ‘more’ also has a [+distributive]
reading, so the two features obviously merge, causing the noun phrase to move
to Spec,DistP. The interesting question is how a noun phrase with contradictory
quantifiers behaves. Consider:
(55) a. *? [FP MINDEN CSALÁDTAG
KEVÉS FÉNYKÉPE sikerült
jól]
every family.member’s few photos
succeeded well
‘Few photos of all family members succeeded well.’
b. * [DistP Minden családtag kevés fényképe [AspP jól sikerült.]]
(56) a. *? [FP KEVÉS CSALÁDTAG
MINDEN FÉNYKÉPE veszett el]
few family.member’s every photo
lost
VM
‘All the photos of few family members got lost.’
b. * [DistP Kevés családtag minden fényképe [AspP el veszett]]

As these examples indicate, if the operator feature percolating up from the quantifier of the head and the operator feature percolating up from the quantifier
of the genitive specifier are distinct – hence cannot merge – the sentence is
ungrammatical. This is because the operator whose feature cannot percolate up to
the noun phrase cannot take sentential scope in violation of the scope principle.
In the Minimalist framework, the ungrammaticality of these sentences must be
due to the fact that one of the contradictory features of the noun phrase cannot be
checked by overt movement. The grammatical way of resolving such conflicts is
to extract the genitive specifier (in fact, a dative-marked noun phrase) into the VP
domain and to move it independently into the functional position with a matching

126

The syntax of Hungarian

feature. Here it can also take sentential scope in observance of the scope principle. (For information on the mechanism of possessor extraction, see Chapter 7.)
For example:
(57) a.

b.

[DistP Minden családtagnaki [FP [ti KEVÉS FÉNYKÉPE ] sikerült jól]]
every family.member-DAT few photo
succeeded well
‘Of every family member, few photos succeeded well.’
[FP KEVÉS CSALÁDTAGNAKi [VP veszett el [ti minden fényképe ]]]
few family.member-DAT lost
VM every photo
‘Of few family members did all the photos get lost.’

If the noun phrase internal quantifier that is intended to have wide scope cannot be
formulated as a genitive specifier – e.g. because the head is a pronoun, which cannot
take a genitive specifier – then it can assume the status of an independent quantifier
via extraposition. This is what happens in the (b) example of the following minimal
pair, where the extraposed quantifier phrase is subsequently moved into Spec,DistP.
(The syntactic category of keves-en ‘few-SUFFIX’ is not quite clear; I assume tentatively that it is a NumP consisting of an indefinite numeral and a pro.)
(58) a. * [FP [KEVESEN MINDEN KÖRZETBŐL] szavaztak a javaslatra]
few
every district-from voted
the proposal-for
‘Few persons from every district voted for the proposal.’
b.

5.4

[DistP Minden körzetbőli [FP [KEVESEN ti ] szavaztak a javaslatra]]
‘From every district, few persons voted for the proposal.’

Quantiﬁers or adverbial modiﬁers?

It was argued in Section 4.2.3. that adverbs expressing a negative frequency, a negative degree, or a negative manner have an inherent [+focus] feature,
which they must check in Spec,FP; for example:
(59) a.

[TopP János [FP RITKÁN [VP jár be az órákra]]]
John
seldom
goes in the classes-to
‘John seldom goes to classes.’

b.

[TopP János [FP ALIG [VP értette
meg az anyagot]]]
John
barely understood VM the material
‘John barely understood the material.’

c.

[TopP János [FP LASSAN [VP fogta
fel a magyarázatot]]]
John
slowly
understood VM the explanation
‘John slowly understood the explanation.’

The question arises of how the positive counterparts of these adverbs are to be
analyzed. Adverbs of frequency are functionally quantifiers quantifying over actions or events; so it is expected that those expressing a ‘universal’ frequency such
as mindig ‘always’ or állandóan ‘constantly’ share the distribution of universal

Quantiﬁcation

127

quantifiers, whereas those expressing a non-universal positive frequency such as
sokszor ‘many times’ or gyakran ‘often’ share the distribution of positive existential
quantifiers. This is exactly what we attest. Universal adverbs of frequency occupy
Spec,DistP in the unmarked case:
(60) a.

b.
(61) a.

b.

[DistP Mindig [DistP minden diák [FP A SZINTAXISÓRÁRÓL késik el]]]
always
every student the syntax-class-from is.late VM
‘Always, for every student, it is the syntax class that he is late for.’
[DistP Mindenki [DistP mindig [FP A SZINTAXISÓRÁRÓL késik el]]]
[DistP Állandóan [DistP minden kollégám [FP AZ INTERNETET böngészi]]]
constantly
every colleague-1SG the Internet-ACC browses
‘Every colleague of mine constantly browses the Internet.’
[DistP Minden kollégám [DistP állandóan [FP AZ INTERNETET böngészi]]]

If we attribute a [+distributive] feature to adverbs of frequency with a [+universal]
meaning component, we correctly predict that they cannot stand either in Spec,FP,
or in Spec,TopP, or be adjoined to TopP (like sentence adverbials):
(62) a. * [TopP János [FP MINDIG késik el]]
John
always late.is VM
‘John is always late.’
b. * [TopP János [FP ÁLLANDÓAN böngészi az internetet]]
John
constantly browses the Internet
(63) a. * [TopP Mindig [TopP János [AspP el késik az óráról]]]
b. * [TopP Állandóan [TopP János [FP AZ INTERNETET böngészi]]]

Like other [+distributive] quantifiers, universal adverbs of frequency can also
appear in the VP – either unstressed, having narrow scope with respect to the
focus, or stressed, taking wide scope over the focus.
(64) a.

[FP KETTEN [VP késnek el  mindig/állandóan a szintaxisóráról]]
two
are.late VM always/constantly the syntax.class-from
‘It is always/constantly two persons who are late for the syntax class.’

b.

[FP KETTEN [VP késnek el mindig/állandóan a szintaxisóráról]]
‘It is two persons who are always/constantly late for the syntax class.’

Adverbs expressing a positive (but non-universal) frequency can move either to
Spec,DistP (65a), or to Spec,FP (65b), or they can stand in the VP, unstressed,
taking narrow scope (65c), or stressed, taking wide scope (65d). That is, they can
occupy the same positions as positive existential quantifiers – presumably because
they are also optionally marked as [+distributive].
(65) a.

Péter [DistP sokszor/gyakran [AspP el felejti megı́rni a leckéjét]]
Peter
many.times/often
VM forgets to.write his homework
‘Peter many times/often forgets to write his homework.’

128

The syntax of Hungarian
b.

Péter [FP SOKSZOR/GYAKRAN felejti el megı́rni a leckéjét]
‘It is many times/often that Peter forgets to write his homework.’

c.

[FP PÉTER felejti el sokszor/gyakran megı́rni a leckéjét]
‘It is Peter who many times/often forgets to write his homework.’

d.

Péter [AspP el felejti  sokszor/gyakran megı́rni a leckéjét]
‘Peter many times/often forgets to write his homework.’

When they express the frequency of the whole event, they stand outside the predicate phrase, adjoined to TopP – similar to other sentence adverbials:
(66)

[TopP Gyakran [TopP a tanárok nem tudják minden diákjuk
often
the teachers not know every student-POSS-3PL
nevét]]
name-POSS-ACC
‘Teachers often don’t know the name of every student of theirs.’

For adverbs of degree, and adverbs of manner, the position left-adjacent to the
AspP projection seems to be the only possibility in the preverbal field (67a). They
cannot stand either in Spec, DistP or adjoined to DistP (67b), nor can they occupy
Spec,FP (67c) or be adjoined to FP (67d).
(67) a.

[DistP Mindenki [tökéletesen/gyorsan [AspP meg értette
a
everybody perfectly/quickly
VM understood the
relativitáselméletet]]]
relativity-theory
‘Everybody understood perfectly/quickly the theory of relativity.’

b. * [DistP Tökéletesen/gyorsan [DistP mindenki [AspP meg értette a
relativitáselméletet ]]]
c. * [DistP Mindenki [FP TÖKÉLETESEN/GYORSAN értette meg a relativitáselméletet]]
d. * [DistP Mindenki [FP tökéletesen/gyorsan [FP A RELATIVITÁSELMÉLETET értette
meg]]]

In the presence of a focus, the adverb of degree or manner occupies a VP-internal
position, as in (68a,b):
(68) a.

[DistP Mindenki [FP csak a relativitáselméletet [VP értette
everybody only the relativity-theory-ACC understood
tökéletesen /gyorsan meg]]]
perfectly /quickly VM
‘For everybody, it was only relativity theory that he understood perfectly/quickly.’

b.

[FP Csak a relativitáselméletet [VP értette
meg János tökéletesen /gyorsan
only the relativity-theory-ACC understood VM John perfectly /quickly
tegnap]]
yesterday
‘It was only relativity theory that John understood perfectly/quickly yesterday.’

If we generate the adverb in an AspP-adjoined position, there is no straightforward
way of deriving the structure in (68b). The simplest way of deriving (68a,b) is to

Quantiﬁcation

129

generate the adverb in the VP and optionally to adjoin it to AspP in the course of
the derivation.
Some adverbs of manner can also function as sentence adverbials. In that case
they are external to the predicate phrase, being adjoined either to the TopP projection or to the Top head (see also Section 2.6):
(69) a.

b.

[Okosan [TopP János [DistP a jegyzeteit is magával vitte]]]
smartly
John
his notes-ACC also with.him took
‘Smartly, John also took his notes with him.’
[János [Top okosan [DistP a jegyzeteit is magával vitte]]]
‘Smartly, John also took his notes with him.’

The VP-internal position of the adverbs of manner and degree in (68a,b) suggests
that these types of adverbs should be generated in the VP and should be preposed
into a pre-AspP position transformationally. Their preposing can be adjunction, or
substitution into the specifier of a MannerP or DegreeP projection, depending on
our theoretical assumptions.

5.5

Summary

In the Hungarian sentence, universal quantifiers and phrases modified
by is ‘also’, még. . . is ‘even’ have a designated position at the head of the predicate phrase: they occupy the specifier of a functional projection called DistP.
Spec,DistP is also available for positive existential quantifiers. A quantifier moved
to Spec,DistP is associated with a distributive interpretation: the predicate holds
separately for every element in the domain of the quantifier. The quantifier in
Spec,DistP has scope over the domain it c-commands. In fact, every preverbal
operator position is a scope position; the scope principle, requiring that operators
c-command their scope, is satisfied at S-structure/spell-out in the Hungarian sentence. Since the functional projection harboring distributive quantifiers is above
the focus projection, a distributive quantifier can only have narrow scope with
respect to the focus if it is left in argument position. (Alternatively, a postverbal
narrow-scope quantifier can be analyzed to occupy a Spec,DistP in a lower series of
operator positions.) A stressed postverbal distributive quantifier has scope over FP;
its VP-internal position may be the result of stylistic postposing from Spec,DistP.
(Alternative ways of assigning wide scope to it were also quoted from the literature.) A noun phrase internal quantifier assumes sentential scope by feature
percolation, or by being extracted into the VP domain, and undergoing operator
movement into scope position on its own. Adverbs of frequency also share the
syntactic behavior of quantifiers.

6

Negation
Two NegP projections1

6.1

In the Hungarian sentence, negation is performed by the negative particle
nem. It can appear before the verb, or before the focus, or before the universal
quantifier, i.e., we can negate the action or state expressed by VP (1a,b), or the
exhaustive identification expressed by FP (1c), or the universality of the quantification expressed by DistP (1d).
(1) a.

János nem táncolt a feleségével.
John not danced his wife-with
‘John didn’t dance with his wife.’

b.

János A FELESÉGÉVEL nem táncolt.
‘It was his wife that John didn’t dance with.’

c.

János nem A FELESÉGÉVEL táncolt.
‘It was not his wife that John danced with.’

d.

Nem mindenki A FELESÉGÉVEL táncolt.
not everybody his wife-with
danced
‘Not everybody danced WITH HIS WIFE.’

The different layers of the predicate can also be negated simultaneously, although
triple negation is not easy to interpret.
(2) a.

1

János nem A FELESÉGÉVEL nem táncolt.
John not his wife-with
not danced
‘It wasn’t his wife that John didn’t dance with.’

b.

Nem mindenki A FELESÉGÉVEL nem táncolt.
not everybody his wife-with
not danced
‘It is not true for everybody that it was his wife that he didn’t dance with.’

c.

Nem mindenki nem A FELESÉGÉVEL táncolt.
‘It wasn’t true for everybody that it wasn’t his wife that he danced with.’

The first theory of Hungarian negation involving two NegP projections was put forth
in Olsvay (2000a, 2000b). Some of the issues discussed here were first raised by Piñon
(1992). Hungarian negation is discussed in detail in Puskás (1998, 2000).

130

Negation
d.

131

Nem mindenki nem FELESÉGÉVEL nem táncolt.
‘It wasn’t true for everybody that it wasn’t his wife that he didn’t dance with.’

The negative particle preceding VP negates the action or state expressed by the
predicate, which is a function associated with a NegP projection in Universal
Grammar. Therefore, we place it in the head position of a NegP dominating VP.
This negative particle must be adjacent to the finite verb; no verb modifier can
intervene between them. The adjacency of the negative particle and the verb must
have the same reason as the adjacency of the focus and the verb. That is, if the
adjacency of the focus and the verb is derived by verb movement from the head of
AspP into F (compare Bródy 1990a, 1990b, 1995), then the adjacency of the negative particle and the V must also be derived by V movement from Asp to Neg, as
follows:
(3)

János [NegP nem hı́vtai [AspP fel ti a feleségét]]
John
not called
up his wife
‘John didn’t call up his wife.’

This solution would, however, raise at least two problems. First, whereas the instances of head movement in the literature involve the left-adjunction of the moved
head to the target, V-to-Neg movement is adjunction to the right. The problem cannot be eliminated by claiming that the negative particle is sitting in Spec,NegP and
that the verb is moved into the empty Neg head – because in the case where NegP
is dominated by FP, the V must move on into F, and it takes the negative particle
along; that is:
(4)

János [FP A FELESÉGÉT [F [nem hı́vtai ]j [NegP tj [AspP fel ti [VP ti ]]]]]
John
his wife-ACC
not called
up
‘It was his wife that John didn’t call up.’

The second problem with the V movement approach is that the focus-negating
particle is not adjacent to the V. If it also represents the head of a NegP, it is hard to
explain why one of the Neg heads attracts the verb, and the other does not. If focus
negation could be proved to represent constituent negation then, naturally, this
argument would be invalid; however, both semantic and syntactic considerations –
to be reviewed below – indicate that focus negation, too, is predicate negation
involving a NegP. It therefore seems less problematic to assume that the VPnegating particle and the V are adjacent because no AspP is projected. That is,
NegP is not an extension of AspP, but is an alternative to it – as represented
in (5):

132

The syntax of Hungarian

(5)

TopP
Spec

Top'

Jánosi
Top

FP
Spec

F'

a feleségétj
F

NegP
Neg

VP

nem
V XP

XP

XP

hívta fel

ti

tj

Negation does in fact neutralize aspect, i.e., the absence of AspP in a negative
sentence is a semantically motivated assumption; compare:
(6) a.

A vonat (már) [AspP át [Asp ment a hı́don,
amikor a baleset történt]]
the train (already) across went the bridge-on when the accident happened
‘The train had (already) gone across the bridge when the accident happened.’

b.

A vonat (épp) [AspP [Asp ment át
a hı́don,
amikor a baleset
the train (just)
went across the bridge-on when the accident
történt]]
happened
‘The train was (just) going across the bridge when the accident happened.’

c.

A vonat (még) nem ment át
a hı́don,
amikor a baleset történt.
the train (yet) not went across the bridge-on when the accident happened
‘The train did not go across the bridge (yet) when the accident happened.’

Whereas the main clause of (6a) is clearly perfective, and that of (6b) is clearly
progressive, the negated equivalent in (6c) is vague aspectually: it can be used
both in a situation in which the crossing of the bridge by the train has not taken
place at all and in a situation in which it has started but has not been completed
yet. Example (6b), with the progressive aspect clearly preserved, could only be
negated in a circumscribed way; for example:
(7)

Nem igaz, hogy a vonat épp ment át
a hı́don . . .
not true that the train just went across the bridge-on
‘It is not true that the train was just going across the bridge . . .’

Negation

133

The assumption that the prefocus negative particle is not adjoined to the focussed
constituent but is the head of a NegP is based on various types of evidence. First,
the unstressed verb following the focussed constituent does not necessarily represent presupposed information. That is, (8a) can be continued also with (8b) (see
Szabolcsi 1980, 1981a), in which case negation is understood to extend over the
whole FP projection:
(8) a.

b.

János nem A FELESÉGÉT hı́vta fel.
John not his wife-ACC called up
‘John didn’t call up HIS WIFE.’
Inkább A LÁNYÁNAK küldött táviratot.
rather his daughter-DAT sent telegram-ACC
‘He rather sent a telegram TO HIS DAUGHTER.’

The following argument was put forth by Olsvay (2000b). Let us assume tentatively that the negative particle + focus sequence, such as that in (8a), forms
a constituent. So as to rule out (9a), i.e., to ensure that the negated constituent
always lands in focus position, we must also assume that the negative particle has
an inherent [+focus] feature, which spreads over the whole negated phrase. In sentences containing two [+focus] constituents, e.g. two wh-phrases or only phrases,
one of them always stays behind the verb. This should also be the case if one of
the [+focus] constituents is a negated phrase. A postverbal negated constituent,
however, is ungrammatical, or very marginal in double focus constructions; see
(9b–d). This is inexplicable, unless we have wrongly assumed that the negative
particle + focus sequence forms a negated constituent.
(9) a.

* János fel hı́vta nem a feleségét.
John up called not his wife-ACC
‘John called up other than his wife.’

b. *? KI hı́vta fel NEM A FELESÉGÉT?
who called up not his wife
‘Who didn’t called up HIS WIFE?’
c.

* JÁNOS nem hı́vta fel NEM A FELESÉGÉT.
John not called up not his wife
‘It was John who didn’t call up other than his wife.’

d. ?* Nem JÁNOS hı́vta fel NEM A FELESÉGÉT.
not John called up not his wife
‘It wasn’t John who called up other than his wife.’

The clearest evidence for the negative head status of the focus-negating particle is
that it shares crucial properties of the VP-negating particle, analyzed as the head of
NegP. First, it licenses the same type of negative pronominal elements beginning
with the morpheme se-; compare:

134

The syntax of Hungarian

(10) a.

Senki nem [VP hı́vta fel a feleségét]
nobody not
called up his wife
‘Nobody called up his wife.’

b.

Senki nem [FP A FELESÉGÉT hı́vta fel]
nobody not
his wife-ACC called up
‘Nobody called up HIS WIFE.’

When immediately preceded by a se-pronoun, both the focus-negating nem and
the VP-negating nem can apparently alternate with a sem particle (discussed in
detail in Section 6.3):
(11) a.

b.

Senki sem [VP hı́vta fel a feleségét]
nobody not
called up his wife
‘Nobody called up his wife.’
Senki sem [FP A FELESÉGÉT hı́vta fel]
nobody not
his wife-ACC called up
‘Nobody called up HIS WIFE.’

The negative particle negating a prefocus universal quantifier, e.g. that in (1d) or
in (12a) below, on the other hand, does not license a negative pronoun, and does
not alternate with sem:
(12) a.

Nem mindenki A FELESÉGÉT hı́vta fel.
not everybody his wife-ACC called up
‘Not everybody called up HIS WIFE.’

b. * Soha nem mindenki A FELESÉGÉT hı́vta fel.
never not everybody his wife-ACC called up
‘Never did everybody call up his wife.’
c. * Soha sem mindenki A FELESÉGÉT hı́vta fel.

These facts suggest that the negation of the universal quantifier is of a different
kind than the negation of VP and FP. Whereas the negative particle negating the FP,
as well as that negating the VP, sits in the head positions of NegP projections, the
negative particle negating mindenki ‘everybody’ represents constituent negation,
with nem adjoined to the quantified noun phrase.
The negative particle can in fact also precede an AspP if the nem ‘not’ phrase
is coordinated with a hanem ‘but also’ phrase:
(13)

János nem [AspP  fel hı́vta a fiúkat], hanem [AspP  meg látogatta őket]
John not
up called the boys but
VM visited them
‘John did not call the boys up, but visited them.’

The nem . . . hanem pair can presumably take AspP complements because they
are coordinators combining two predicate phrases rather than being operators
extending a VP.

Negation

135

That the nem element of the nem . . . hanem pair is not the head of a NegP is
also clear from its prosody. Whereas a regular nem forms a single phonological
word with the constituent following it, bearing the word-initial stress, the nem
coordinated with hanem is unstressed; for example:
Nem  JÁNOS hı́vta fel a fiúkat, hanem  PÉTER látogatta meg őket.
not John called up the boys but
Peter visited VM them
‘What happened was not JOHN calling up the boys but PETER visiting them.’

(14)

The prosodic behavior of the Neg head is similar to that of the focus: not only is it
stressed, but it also deletes the stress of the constituent following it. If we mean by
‘main assertion’ the part of the content of a sentence that cannot be presupposed,
then in a VP the main assertion is represented by the V, in an FP it is represented
by the focus, whereas in a NegP dominating FP it is represented by the negative
particle. After all, if the focus is in the scope of negation, even the content of focus
becomes presupposed. The stress pattern of the assertive part of the Hungarian
sentence is determined by the following principle:
(15)

The stressing of the predicative section of the Hungarian sentence
The assertive elements following the constituent representing the main assertion
(that which cannot be presupposed) are unstressed.2

(A distributive quantifier in Spec,DistP can convey presupposed information, hence
it is not analyzed as the carrier of main assertion. Consequently, it is not predicted
to delete the stress of the constituent following it.)
The assumption that a negated universal quantifier represents a constituent is in
fact not sufficient to account for its peculiar word order behavior. Consider first
the word order of a non-negated universal quantifier (16a), then that of a negated
universal quantifier in a focusless sentence (16b–c), and finally the word order of
a negated universal quantifier in the presence of a focus (16d):
(16) a.

b.

[DistP Mindenki [AspP fel hı́vta a feleségét]]
everybody
up called his wife
‘Everybody called up his wife.’
[FP Nem mindenki hı́vta fel a feleségét]
not everybody called up his wife

c. * [DistP Nem mindenki [AspP fel hı́vta a feleségét]]
d.

[DistP Nem mindenki [FP A FELESÉGÉT hı́vta fel]]
‘For not everybody was it his wife that he called up.’

A non-negated universal quantifier occupies Spec,DistP (16a), and so does a
negated universal quantifier in the presence of a focus as well (16d); the negated
2

The claim that the function of focus is to express the main assertion in the sentence has
been adopted from Herburger (1997).

136

The syntax of Hungarian

universal quantifier of a focusless sentence, on the other hand, appears to land in
Spec,FP (16b). We can derive these facts if we assume that nem mindenki is inserted
into its base-generated position in the VP associated with both the [+focus] feature of negative existential quantifiers and the [+distributive] feature of universal
quantifiers; moreover – for reasons of economy – it checks by overt movement
the feature which it can check first, in a closer projection. In (16b) the Spec,FP
position is open for nem mindenki, so it moves there to check its [+focus] feature
overtly.3 In (16d), on the other hand, Spec,FP is occupied; only the more distant
Spec,DistP is available; so nem mindenki checks its [+distributive] feature overtly.

6.2

The locus of negative pronouns licensed by nem

As was illustrated under (10) and (11), a negative particle functioning as
the head of a NegP can license negative pronouns and proadverbs beginning with
the se- morpheme. Although these se-phrases are identified as negative elements
by native speakers, they always require the presence of a negative particle, and the
co-occurrence of one or more se-phrases and the negative particle does not yield
multiple negation semantically. This type of spreading of the [+negative] feature
over indefinite pronominals is often referred to in the literature as negative concord
(compare, for example, Puskás 2000).
The distribution of se-phrases is similar to that of distributive quantifiers (e.g.
positive universals and is ‘also’ phrases) – apart from the fact that in the sentence
types in which they occur the presence of the negative particle blocks the projection
of an AspP and the preposing of the verb modifier into a preverbal position. Thus
in a focusless sentence, the se-phrase either immediately precedes the negated VP,
or stands postverbally, bearing a heavy stress:
(17) a.

3

János  semmit  nem hallott a függöny mögül.
John nothing not heard the curtain behind
‘John didn’t hear anything from behind the curtain.’

In the case of a focussed negated universal quantifier, the negative particle can marginally
also license a se-pronoun, and in the presence of a se-pronoun it can also alternate with
sem; for example:
(i)

? Soha nem/sem MINDENKI hı́vja fel a feleségét.
never not
everybody calls up his wife
‘Never does everybody call up his wife.’

This construction may be marginally possible because the linear position of the negative
particle adjoined to the universal quantifier is non-distinct from that of a focus-negating
nem; hence, it can be marginally reanalyzed as such.

Negation
b.

János  nem hallott  semmit a függöny mögül.
John not heard nothing the curtain behind
‘John didn’t hear anything from behind the curtain.’

c.

János  nem hallott a függöny mögül  semmit.
John not heard the curtain behind nothing
‘John didn’t hear anything from behind the curtain.’

137

The preverbal se-phrase in (17a) seems to occupy the same Spec,DistP position
that a positive universal quantifier would occupy (18a). The postverbal se-phrases
in (17b,c), on the other hand, seem to correspond to a positive universal quantifier subjected to the rule of Stylistic Postposing, proposed under (48) in Section
5.3.3. This rule allows constituents preceding the main assertion to be postposed
behind the verb, carrying along the stress assigned to them in their preverbal operator position (18b,c):
(18) a.

b.
c.

János [DistP  mindent [VP hallott a függöny mögül]]
John
everything heard the curtain behind
‘John heard everything from behind the curtain.’
János hallott  mindent a függöny mögül.
János hallott a függöny mögül  mindent.

As in the case of positive distributive phrases and other types of operators, as well,
the position of the se-phrase is independent of its grammatical function. Thus a
subject se-phrase has the same word order possibilities as an object se-phrase:
(19) a.



Senki  nem jött be a szobába.
nobody not came in the room-into
‘Nobody came into the room.’

b.



c.



Nem jött be a szobába  senki.
not came in the room-into nobody
‘Nobody came into the room.’
Nem jött be  senki a szobába.

Since the DistP projection at the head of the predicate phrase can have more than
one specifier, it provides space for any number of positive distributive quantifiers,
some or all of which can subsequently also undergo Stylistic Postposing into
postverbal positions. Se-phrases have the same word order possibilities:
(20) a.

b.
c.

Mari soha senkinek
nem beszélt a terveiről.
Mary never nobody-DAT not spoke her plans-about
‘Mary never spoke about her plans to anybody.’
Mari soha nem beszélt a terveiről senkinek.
Mari senkinek nem beszélt soha a terveiről.

138

The syntax of Hungarian
d.
e.

Mari nem beszélt a terveiről soha senkinek.
Mari nem beszélt soha a terveiről senkinek.

In the presence of a focus, a se-phrase can only be licensed by a negative particle
above the focus; compare:
(21) a.

Senki nem [FP JÁNOST [VP hı́vta meg]]
nobody not
John-ACC invited VM
‘Nobody invited JOHN.’

b. * Senki [FP JÁNOST [NegP nem [VP hı́vta meg]]]

The possibility of Stylistic Postposing is, naturally, also open for prefocus sephrases (similar to prefocus positive universal quantifiers):
(22) a.

b.



Senki nem VONATTAL érkezett.
nobody not train-with arrived
‘Nobody arrived BY TRAIN.’
Nem VONATTAL érkezett  senki.

The Spec,DistP position of a negated sentence cannot contain a positive distributive
quantifier (23a,b) unless a focus intervenes between Spec,DistP and the negative
particle, as in (23c):
(23) a. * Mindenki nem JÁNOST hı́vta meg.
everybody not John-ACC invited VM
‘For everybody, it wasn’t John that he invited.’
b. * Mindenki nem hı́vta meg Jánost.
‘Everybody didn’t invite John.’
c.

Mindenki (csak) JÁNOST nem hı́vta meg.
everybody only John-ACC not invited VM
‘For everybody, it was only John that he didn’t invite.’

A VP-negating nem separated from Spec,DistP by a focus can only license a VPinternal unstressed se-phrase (24a). The construction in (24a) is parallel to that in
(24b), which contains a positive distributive quantifier in the scope of focus, left
in situ, receiving no stress.
(24) a.

Csak JÁNOST nem hı́vta meg senki.
only John-ACC not invited VM nobody
‘It was only John whom nobody invited.’

compare:
b.

Csak JÁNOST hı́vta meg mindenki.
only John-ACC invited VM everybody
‘It was only John whom everybody invited.’

Negation

139

A structure like (24a) could also contain a positive distributive quantifier in its
Spec,DistP, in addition to its VP-internal se-phrase:
(25)

Mindig csak JÁNOST nem hı́vja meg senki.
always only John-ACC not invites VM nobody
‘It is always only John whom nobody invites.’

It is a matter of discussion whether the negative pronouns accompanying the negative particle in the negative concord constructions of various languages represent
indefinites with no quantificational force of their own, bound by a negative operator
(compare Ladusaw 1992, 1994); whether they are negative operators themselves
forced to move to Spec,NegP by the Neg Criterion so as to check the [+neg] feature of the Neg head (compare Haegeman and Zanuttini 1991, Haegeman 1995,
Zanuttini 1997, Puskás 2000); or whether they are negative polarity universal
quantifiers subject to Q-Raising (see Giannakidou 2000). The facts of Hungarian
reviewed above seem to support a combination of the latter two theories. Hungarian
se-phrases appear in the canonical positions of distributive quantifiers, primarily in
Spec,DistP – provided that DistP is in the local environment of a negative particle.
To be able to predict the possible structural positions and the prosody of se-phrases,
we make the following assumptions:
i.
ii.

A se-phrase has the features [+negative, +distributive].
The functional heads Neg and Dist, instantiating these features, can fuse,
projecting a joint DistNegP.

Then it follows that a se-phrase will immediately precede the negative particle,
landing in the specifier of the joint DistNegP, checking the [+dist, +neg] features
of the head, and will have scope over DistNeg . It also follows that the specifier
of a DistNegP cannot be filled with a positive distributive quantifier. A se-phrase
in Spec,DistNegP is, naturally, subject to Stylistic Postposing. If an intervening
focus blocks the fusion of NegP with DistP, then the se-phrases generated in the
VP will have no scope position to move to. Hence, it will stay in situ unstressed,
and will take scope only over the VP. In this case the [+negative] feature of the
se-phrase is checked against that of the negative particle covertly.
Under these assumptions, the preverbal se-phrases in (17a), (19a), (20a,b,c),
(21a), and (22a) all occupy Spec,DistNegP. In (17b,c), (19b,c), (20b,c,d,e), and
(22b) the [+distributive, +negative] quantifiers surfacing postverbally have undergone Stylistic Postposing, as well, i.e., they have been moved back to postverbal position, preserving both the stress and the scope assigned to them in Spec,DistNegP.
In (24a) the nem preceded by a focus cannot fuse with a non-adjacent Dist head,
hence it provides no preverbal landing site for the se-phrase. Therefore, the sephrase it licenses remains in situ, unstressed, having narrow scope with respect to

140

The syntax of Hungarian

the focus. A Spec,DistP not adjacent to, and not fused with, nem is available for a
positive distributive quantifier, as is illustrated in (25).
These are the structures assigned, for example, to (21a) and (24a):
DistNegP

(26)

Spec

DistNeg'

FP

DistNeg

F'

Spec

F

VP

V
Senki

nem JÁNOST

…

hívta meg

(27)

[FP Csak JÁNOST [NegP nem [VP hı́vta meg senki]]]

6.3

The status of sem

In a negative environment, the is ‘also’ particle adjoined to various types
of distributive phrases is replaced by sem ‘neither’.
(28) a.

El jött Péter is.
VM came Peter also
‘Peter, too, came.’

b.

El jött két diák is.
VM came two student
‘Two students (even) came.’

(29) a.

Nem jött el Péter sem.
not came VM Peter neither
‘Peter didn’t come, either.’

b.

Nem jött el egy diák sem.
not came VM one student even
‘No student [not even one student] came.’

In (28a) is functions as an additive particle, the equivalent of ‘also’; in (28b), on
the other hand, it is a scalar particle expressing that the given number is considered

Negation

141

many. Accordingly, sem in (29a) functions as an anti-additive particle, whereas in
(29b) it is the negative counterpart of the scalar particle, expressing that the given
number is few. (So, while is is typically added to numbers higher than one, sem is
typically combined with egy ‘one’.)
Interestingly, when no Stylistic Postposing is performed, the negative particle
nem expected to follow the sem phrase is not spelled out:
(30) a.

b.

Péter sem jött el.
Peter neither came VM
‘Peter didn’t come, either.’
Egy diák sem jött el.
one student neither came VM
‘No student came.’

Just as the particle is can accompany certain types of universal quantifiers (e.g.
bárki (is), akárki (is) ‘anybody’) as well, sem can also be freely combined with sequantifiers – e.g. senki (sem) ‘nobody’. In sentences containing a se-phrase supplied
with sem we find the same distribution of sem and nem as was attested in (29)–(30):
nem is only spelled out if the se-phrase + sem complex stands postverbally.
(31) a.

Mari semmit
sem mondott.
Mary nothing-ACC not said
‘Mary said nothing.’

b.

Mari nem mondott semmit sem.

(32) a.

Mari soha senkinek
sem beszélt a terveiről.
Mary never nobody-DAT not spoke her plans-about
‘Mary never spoke to anybody about her plans.’

b.

Mari nem beszélt soha senkinek sem a terveiről.
Mary not spoke never nobody-DAT her plans-about
‘Mary didn’t ever speak about her plans to anybody.’

(33) a.

Mari senkinek
semmit
sem ı́gért.
Mary nobody-DAT nothing-ACC not promised
‘Mary didn’t promise anybody anything.’

b.

Mari nem ı́gért
senkinek
semmit sem.
Mary not promised nobody-DAT nothing-ACC
‘Mary didn’t promise anything to anybody.’

In the (a) sentences of (31)–(33) sem seems in a certain sense to stand for nem.
Relying on this intuition, traditional Hungarian grammars analyze this type of sem
as an allomorph of nem. In fact, however, the situation is more complex. First, the
prosody of sem is surprisingly different from that of nem: whereas nem is stressed
and forms a phonological word with the subsequent verb, sem is unstressed and

142

The syntax of Hungarian

forms a phonological word with the preceding noun phrase. That sem is not simply
an allomorph of nem is shown particularly clearly by the (b) versions of (31)–(33),
involving Stylistic Postposing, in which nem remains in preverbal position, whereas
sem moves together with the postposed se-elements. In these examples sem is understood to be simply the negative equivalent of the distributive particle is.
I propose the following account of these facts. Let us assume that the particle sem
(and presumably is, as well) is an optional spelling-out of the head of DistP, which,
when present, is obligatorily cliticized to the constituent in Spec,DistP. When Dist
and Neg fuse, sharing a single projection, the joint DistNeg head cannot be doubly
realized: either nem or sem must be dropped. When sem is retained, it will be
cliticized to the constituent in Spec,DistP. If the filler of Spec,DistP, with sem
cliticized to it, undergoes Stylistic Postposing, the empty DistNeg head is left
without a local identifier, hence it must be spelled out by nem.
The assumption that sem is the head of DistP is confirmed by the fact that in
sentences with more than one negative quantifier, only the rightmost one can be
followed by sem:
(34) a. * János soha sem sehová sem autóval megy.
John never
nowhere car-with goes
‘John never goes by car anywhere.’
b.

János soha sehová sem autóval megy.

A numeral phrase is interpreted as a negative quantifier only with the scalar sem
adjoined to it (obviously because it has neither a negative morpheme, nor a distributive morpheme in itself). In a series of [+negative,+distributive] phrases, the
numeral phrase can only be the rightmost one, since elsewhere it would not be
adjacent to sem:
(35) a. * János egy szót senkinek sem szólt.
John a word nobody-DAT said
‘John didn’t say a word to anybody.’
b. * János egy szót sem senkinek sem szólt.
c. János senkinek egy szót sem szólt.

If sem is the head of a DistP with multiple specifiers, then it will follow that it can
only appear after the last one of a series of negative quantifiers.

6.4

The universal and existential readings of negative pronouns

Se-phrases sometimes appear to function as the negative equivalents of
universal quantifiers; other times they seem to act as the negative equivalents of

Negation

143

existential quantifiers; compare:
(36) a.

Senki sem/nem érkezett.
nobody not
arrived
‘Nobody arrived. [There wasn’t anybody who arrived.]’

b.

Nem érkezett senki (sem).
‘Nobody arrived. [There wasn’t anybody who arrived.]’

(37) a.

Senki sem/nem érkezett meg.
nobody not
arrived VM
‘Nobody arrived. [It is true for every person in question that he did not arrive.]’

b.

Nem érkezett meg senki (sem).
‘Nobody arrived. [It is true for every person in question that he did not arrive.]’

(38) a.

b.

János semmit
sem/nem mondott.
John nothing-ACC not
said
‘John said nothing.’
János nem mondott semmit (sem).
‘John didn’t say anything.’

(39) a.

János semmit sem/nem mondott el.
John nothing not
said
VM
‘John didn’t disclose anything. [It is true for everything that John didn’t disclose
it.]’

b.

János nem mondott el semmit (sem).
‘John didn’t disclose anything. [It is true for everything that John didn’t disclose
it.]’

Whereas the se-phrases in (36)–(39) have either only the existential or only the
universal interpretation, certain se-phrases are ambiguous; for example:
(40) a.

b.

János senkivel
sem/nem találkozott.
John nobody-with not
met
‘John didn’t meet with anybody.’
János nem találkozott senkivel (sem).

The fact that the (a) and (b) sentences in (36)–(40) have identical interpretations
suggests that the existential or universal reading is not a function of the position
of the se-phrase relative to the negative particle or to the verb; rather it depends on
what type of predicate the sentence has. The predicates of (36) and (38) (érkezik
‘arrive (imperfective)’ and mond ‘say’) require their argument represented by
the se-phrase to be [–specific], whereas those of (37) and (39) (meg érkezik
‘arrive (perfective)’, and el mond ‘tell, disclose’) require it to be [+specific].
The verb találkozik ‘meet’ in (40) allows its theme to be either [–specific] or
[+specific]. These selectional restrictions can be demonstrated by independent

144

The syntax of Hungarian

evidence. Observe that the relevant arguments of the verbs of (36) and (38) cannot
be represented by any type of specific (strong) noun phrase, whereas the relevant
arguments of the verbs of (37) and (39) cannot be represented by any type of
non-specific (weak) noun phrase.4
(41) a.

b.

(42) a.

b.

Érkezett *a vendég/*mindenki/valaki.
arrived the guest/ everybody/somebody
‘There arrived *the guest/*everybody/somebody.’
Mondtam *az érdekes dolgot/*minden érdekes dolgot/érdekes
said-I
the interesting thing/ every interesting thing/interesting
dolgokat.
things
‘I said *the interesting thing/*every interesting thing/interesting things.’
Meg érkeztek *vendégek/a vendégek.
VM arrived guests /the guests
‘*Guests/the guests arrived.’
El mondtam ??érdekes dolgokat /minden érdekes dolgot.
VM said-I
interesting things /every interesting thing
‘I said (disclosed) ??interesting things/every interesting thing.’

The specificity feature of the noun phrase representing the theme of találkozik
‘meet’ is not constrained by the predicate:
(43)

Találkoztam fiúkkal /a fiúval /mindenkivel.
met-I
boys-with/the boy-with/everybody-with
‘I met with boys/with the boy/with everybody.’

These facts lead to the conclusion that the interpretation of a se-phrase is determined
by the specificity feature associated with the argument of the given predicate that
it represents. A [–specific] se-phrase is understood as an existential quantifier,
whereas a [+specific] se-phrase is interpreted as a universal quantifier. A se-phrase
is ambiguous if it represents a [+/–specific] argument.5
This conclusion appears, at first sight, to be contradicted by the fact that a
prefocus se-phrase is always understood as a universal quantifier, no matter whether
it represents an argument required to be [+specific] or [–specific]; compare:
4

The verbs claimed here to require a non-specific theme, e.g. érkezik ‘arrive’, mond ‘say’
are not ‘indefiniteness-effect’ verbs in English; compare:
(i)
(ii)

John arrived.
John said his lesson.

In Hungarian, only the prefixed, perfective counterparts of these verbs can take a specific
theme; the non-prefixed verbs in question are like the English there is. . . construction;
they accept nothing but a non-specific argument.
5
For further discussion of this topic, see Sections 2.5 and 7.2.

Negation
(44) a.

Senki sem/nem TEGNAP érkezett.
nobody not
yesterday arrived
‘For nobody was it yesterday when he arrived.’

b.

Senki sem/nem TEGNAP érkezett meg.
nobody not
yesterday arrived VM
‘For nobody was it yesterday when he arrived.’

145

Recall, however, that in Section 2.5 we argued that if a predicate is subsumed by
a focus phrase, then the specificity restrictions associated with its arguments are
neutralized. At the same time, a specificity restriction of a different kind, called
the Specificity Filter in É. Kiss (1993), is activated (see also Section 4.5.2):
(45)

The Specificity Filter
If Opi is an operator which has scope over Opj and binds a variable in the scope
of Opj , then Opi must be specific.

A se-phrase is a quantifier having scope over the focus, and binding a variable in
the scope of the focus – hence it is subject to the Specificity Filter, which forces a
specific universal reading on it.
Since the canonical position of the different types of se-phrases is invariably
the specifier of a DistP fused with NegP, it seems surprising at first sight that
se-phrases have a variable interpretation: they can be understood either existentially or universally. After all, in non-negative sentences, Spec,DistP typically
harbors universal quantifiers of the minden ‘every’ type, which are generally believed to be inherently [+specific], and to be barred from contexts allowing only a
[–specific] indefinite (compare *Minden fiú érkezett ‘Every boy arrived’). In fact,
however, Spec,DistP can also be filled with a sok . . . ‘many . . .’ phrase, as well as
with numeral phrases modified by is such as két fiú is ‘two boys (even)’, which are
existential quantifiers, and can represent non-specific arguments; compare Két fiú
is érkezett ‘Two boys arrived’.
Spec,DistP is also the canonical landing site of pronouns involving the morphemes bár and akár ‘any’, which, although traditionally categorized as universals,
can also be interpreted either existentially or universally in non-veridical contexts.
Their interpretation, too, depends on whether the argument they represent is selected by the verb as [–specific] or as [+specific]; compare:
(46) a.

b.

[TopP Mari [DistP akármit/bármit [AspP el mondhat a szüleinek]]]
Mary
anything
VM can.tell her parents-DAT
‘Mary can tell her parents anything.’
Mari akármit/bármit mond, senki nem hisz
neki.
Mary anything
says nobody not believes her
‘Whatever Mary says, nobody believes her.’

146

The syntax of Hungarian

What is more, even certain types of universals involving the morpheme mind
‘every’ can function as [–specific] existentials in Spec,DistP; compare:
(47) a.

b.

Minden történt már
a mi házunkban: betörés, rablás, gyilkosság.
everything happened already in our house:
burglary, robbery, murder
‘There has already been everything in our house: burglary, robbery, murder.’
Mindenféle ember érkezett.
every-kind man arrived
‘There arrived all kinds of men.’

That is, the feature that the head of DistP instantiates and that the potential fillers of
Spec,DistP share is not the feature [+universal] but the feature [+distributive]. According to the evidence of sentences like (48) se-phrases also possess this feature:
(48)

Senki sem emelte fel a zongorát.
nobody not lifted up the piano
‘Nobody lifted the piano.’

Example (48) does not mean that nobody participated in a collective lifting event;
it rather expresses that nobody performed a separate lifting act.
In sum: the existential versus universal reading of a se-pronoun correlates primarily with the specificity feature of the argument it represents. The position of
the pronoun plays only an indirect role in its interpretation: a se-pronoun with
scope over the focus is always universal because the Specificity Filter forces a
[+specific] feature on it, no matter what verb it belongs to.6
6

Puskás (2000) argues on the basis of tests proposed by Zanuttini (1997) that se-phrases
always function as universal quantifiers. Thus, both existentially and universally interpreted se-phrases can be modified by almost/absolutely, which is a property of universal
quantifiers not shared by existentials; compare:
(i)

* Majdnem valaki
érkezett.
almost somebody arrived
‘Almost somebody arrived.’

(ii)

Majdnem mindenki meg érkezett.
almost everybody VM arrived
‘Almost everybody arrived.’

(iii)

Majdnem senki nem érkezett (meg).
almost nobody not arrived VM
‘Almost nobody arrived.’

(iv)

Nem érkezett (meg) majdnem senki.
not arrived VM almost nobody
‘Almost nobody arrived.’

Puskás’s second argument for the universal quantifier status of se-phrases involves
donkey anaphora. Whereas existential quantifiers can establish anaphoric links from a

Negation

6.5

147

Long distance negative polarity

The claim that se-phrases are not indefinites bound by negation but are
distributive quantifiers with a negative feature is also supported by the fact that they
are only licensed by a clause-mate NegP. If they were indefinites in the scope of
negation, we would also expect them to be licit in a clause subordinated to a negated
sentence – as is the case with English negative polarity items. In fact, indefinite
pronouns in the scope of matrix negation cannot have a se-morpheme; they have
the form of indefinite pronouns occurring in other types of non-veridical contexts
(e.g. in conditional, interrogative, optative, etc. sentences): they are represented
by pronominal elements containing a vala- ‘some-’, a bár- ‘any-’, or an akár‘any-’ morpheme (see also Tóth 1999). Non-veridical vala- ‘some-’ pronouns are
obligatorily supplied with the distributive is particle. Is can be attached to bár- and
akár- pronouns, as well; compare:
(49) a.

Nem ı́gérték,
hogy az ügyemben bármit/akármit/valamit is tesznek.
not promised-they that my case-in
anything-ACC
do-they
‘They didn’t promise that they would do anything in my case.’

b.

Kétlem, hogy bárki/akárki/valaki is [AspP meg érkezne
doubt-I that anybody
VM would.arrive
‘I doubt that anybody would arrive this afternoon.’

c.

Nem hiszem, hogy bárki/valaki is [FP JÁNOST támogatná]
not believe-I that anybody
John-ACC would.support
‘I don’t believe that, for anybody, it is John that he would support.’

ma délután]
this afternoon

non-c-commanding position, se-phrases, like universal quantifiers, cannot bind a pronoun which they do not c-command; compare:
(v)

Azok a lányok, akik valamilyen lovati vettek, azt
mondták, hogy proi rúg.
those the girls who some
horse bought it-ACC said
that pro kicks
‘The girls who bought some horse said that it kicked.’

(vi) * Azok a lányok, akik minden lovati meg vettek, azt
mondták, hogy proi
those the girls who every horse VM bought it-ACC said
that pro
rúg.
kicks
‘The girls who bought every horse said that it kicked.’
(vii) * Azok a lányok, akik nem vettek egy lovat semi , azt
mondták, hogy proi
those the girls who not bought one horse neither it-ACC said
that pro
rúg.
kicks
‘The girls who bought no horse said that it kicked.’
These tests would, however, have a compelling force only if the roles of the features [+/–
universal], [+/–specific], and [+/–negative] in licensing almost/absolutely and donkey
anaphora were tested and explained separately.

148

The syntax of Hungarian

To all appearances, the bármit (is)/valamit is elements of the embedded clauses
occupy Spec,DistP. (Their position is above AspP, as is clear from (49b), and also
above FP, as is clear from (49c).) The particle is, spelling out the Dist head to
be cliticized to the filler of Spec,DistP, provides morphological evidence of their
Spec,Dist position. Like other types of distributive quantifiers, they are also subject
to Stylistic Postposing:

Nem hiszem, hogy JÁNOST támogatná
bárki/valaki is.
not believe-I that John-ACC would.support anybody
‘I don’t believe that, for anybody, it is John that he would support.’

(50)

The fact that the non-veridical pronouns in question must also raise to Spec,DistP
suggests that they are also [+distributive] quantifiers rather than bound indefinites,
and they are related to the licensing matrix negation by being in its scope, rather
than by being bound by it.7

6.6

The negative existential verb

The constraint in (15) requires that the V be adjacent to the VP-negating
particle, and form a phonological word with it. If the verb involved is the indicative
present tense 3rd person verb of existence, the Neg +V sequence merges into a
single word not only prosodically, but also morphologically: Neg + EXIST-INDPRES-3 is replaced by the morphologically non-compositional nincs; compare:
(51)

én nem vagyok otthon
I not am
at.home

mi nem vagyunk otthon
we not are
at.home

te nem vagy otthon
you not are at.home

ti nem vagytok otthon
you not are
at.home

ő nincs otthon
he isn’t at.home

ők nincsenek otthon
they aren’t
at.home

The nem incorporated into the verb of existence behaves syntactically exactly as a
non-incorporated nem does; i.e., it blocks the AspP projection (the verb modifier
must stay in its postverbal, base-generated position):
(52) a.

b.

7

János [AspP itt van]
John
here is
‘John is here.’
János [NegVP nincs itt]
John
isn’t here

For a different view, see Tóth (1999) who claims – following Giannakidou and Quer
(1995) – that valaki is type pronouns are bound non-selectively by the closest non-veridical
operator.

Negation

149

The FP-negating nem, which is not adjacent to the verb, naturally does not fuse
morphologically with the verb of existence:
(53)

Nem [FP JÁNOS van itt]
not
John is here
‘It isn’t John who is here.’

Nincs licenses non-specific se-pronouns:
(54)

Semmi nincs a hűtőszekrényben.
nothing isn’t the refrigerator-in
‘There isn’t anything in the refrigerator.’

In such cases the Neg + EXIST-IND-PRES-3 complex also fuses with the head of
Dist. When Dist is spelled out by sem, the joint DistNegV head is realized as sincs
(55a), unless sem is cliticized to a se-pronoun undergoing Stylistic Postposing;
compare:
(55) a.

b.

6.7

Senki sincs otthon.
nobody isn’t at.home
‘Nobody is at home.’
Nincs otthon senki sem.

Summary

This chapter has argued that in the Hungarian sentence either the VP
level, or the FP level, or both can be negated. Both the VP-negating particle and
the FP-negating particle project a NegP. The negative particle negating the universal
quantifier, on the other hand, represents constituent negation.
Hungarian displays negative concord: the Neg heads can license negative sepronouns. The canonical location of se-phrases is the specifier of the projection
of a Dist head fused with Neg. A se-pronoun in Spec,DistNegP can also undergo
Stylistic Postposing, an operation moving it into postverbal position together with
the stress and scope assigned to it in Spec,DistP. A se-quantifier in the scope of
focus remains in its base-generated VP-internal position unstressed.
Se-pronouns are interpreted universally or existentially depending on whether
they are assigned the feature [+specific] or [–specific]. The specificity feature
of a se-pronoun is primarily determined by the verb selecting it. For example,
the theme of an indefiniteness-effect verb is [–specific], hence existential. The
syntactic position of a se-pronoun affects its interpretation through the Specificity
Filter: a se-phrase preceding the focus, and binding a variable in the domain of
focus, is necessarily specific, hence universal.

150

The syntax of Hungarian

Sem, the negative counterpart of the distributive/additive/scalar is particle, has
been argued to represent the head of a negative DistP, cliticized to the quantifier in
Spec,DistP. The head of a joint DistNegP projection can be spelled out either as sem
or as nem – unless sem is cliticized to a phrase removed via Stylistic Postposing,
leaving nem as the only option.
Indefinite pronouns in the scope of the negative particle of a superordinate
sentence are of the type bármi/akármi/valami is. They also land in the Spec,DistP
position of their clause, which is evidence of their quantifier status.

7

The noun phrase
The inner structures of the various types of verb complements resemble
the inner structure of the extended verb phrase in their outlines: they consist of a
lexical phrase embedded in morphosyntactic projections and operator projections.
The noun phrase, too, will be analyzed as a complex containing a lexical kernel
(the NP proper) subsumed by operator projections extending it into an indefinite
numeral phrase (NumP) and/or a definite determiner phrase (DP). The full range
of morphosyntactic projections that play a role in the noun phrase will become
evident in the analysis of the possessive construction.1

7.1

The basic syntactic layers of the noun phrase

The minimal noun projection appearing in the Hungarian sentence is a
bare singular case-marked noun; for example:
(1) a.

b.

1

János könyvet olvas.
John book-ACC reads
‘John is book-reading.’
János moziba ment.
John cinema-to went
‘John went to (the) cinema.’

The first syntactic theory of the Hungarian noun phrase was put forth by Szabolcsi (1981b,
1983b, 1992a, 1992b, 1994a, Szabolcsi and Laczkó 1992). Noticing that the Hungarian
noun phrase contains too many specifiers to fit into the single slot provided by X-bar theory,
she identified the article as the head of a functional projection. Her observations and her
proposal contributed to the emergence of the idea of noun phrase internal functional
projections in generative grammar.
The Hungarian noun phrase aroused renewed interest in the Minimalist framework
of the late 1990s, particularly because of its interesting pattern of agreement and antiagreement in the possessive construction, and because of the role that the definiteness
feature of the noun phrase plays in verb–object agreement; compare Bartos (1997, 1999a,
2000a), den Dikken (1999a), and É. Kiss (1998d, 2000a).
151

152

The syntax of Hungarian

In the unmarked case such nouns function as verb modifiers. In Section 3.6 verb
modifiers were shown to display both phrase-like and head-like properties: they
move into Spec,AspP like a phrase, and merge with the V in Asp like a head,
which suggests that they are both minimal and maximal, i.e., they are phrases
containing merely a head. They can also undergo operator movement into Spec,FP
and Spec,DistP, and can even be topicalized if contrasted (see Section 2.7), which
is clear evidence of their phrasal status. Consequently, bare nouns will be analyzed
as noun phrases (NPs proper). An NP is a lexical projection consisting of an N,
and in case N is an argument-taking head, also of a noun phrase or postpositional
phrase complement – a possibility to be investigated in Section 7.4. The NP can
also be modified by adjectival phrases and, when used in a sentence, it is embedded
in a Case phrase (KP). That is:
KP

(2)

K

NP
AdjP

NP

N

-t

szép

lány

-ACC

beautiful

girl

L

szép

lányt

beautiful girl-ACC

The morphophonological linearization of the noun phrase is represented on the
right-hand side of the arrow. Bartos (1999a) assumes that the structure in (2) is a
three-dimensional tree whose K element is marked as a head in syntax and as a
suffix in morphology. Since a syntactic head precedes its complement, whereas
a morphological suffix is right-adjoined to its lexical stem, the tree must be linearized differently in syntax and in morphophonology.
Hungarian noun phrases can be supplied with either a (suffixal) plural marker
or a numeral – but not both. The plural marker is assumed to appear in the head
position of a numeral phrase (NumP) projection dominating NP (3a), whereas the
numeral is assumed to appear in Spec,NumP (3b). In case Spec,NumP is filled, an
economy principle (akin to the Doubly-filled Comp Filter) blocks the spelling-out
of the [+plural] feature of the Num head.2
2

The principle at work may be the principle ‘Economize functional heads’ proposed by
Dimitrova-Vulchanova (1998).

The noun phrase

NumP

(3) a.

NumP

b.

Spec

NP

Num

153

Num'
Num

NP

N

-k

lány

-PL

girl

L

lányok

két

lány

girls

two

girl

The numerals appearing in Spec,NumP include cardinal numbers (among them egy
‘one’, which, when unstressed, is interpreted as an indefinite article), as well as
néhány ‘some’, számos ‘several’, sok ‘many’, minden ‘every’, hány ‘how many’,
etc. 1st and 2nd person pronouns also count as NumPs; see footnote 11 of Chapter 3.
A NP or a NumP can be further extended by a quantifier ending in -ik (e.g. mindegyik ‘each’, bármelyik ‘any’, valamelyik ‘a certain’, semelyik ‘no’, melyik ‘which’)
into a quantifier phrase (QP) (4), and/or by a demonstrative of the e/eme/ezen ‘this’,
ama/azon ‘that’ type into a demonstrative phrase (DemP) (5a,b).
QP

(4)

Spec

Q'
Q

NumP
Num'

Spec
Num

(5) a.

b.

NP

melyik

két

kérdés

which

two

question

[DemP e [NumP két [NP kérdés]]]
this
two question
‘these two questions’
? [DemP ezen [QP bármelyik [NP kérdés]]]
this
any
question
‘any of these questions’

154

The syntax of Hungarian

Noun phrases extended by an -ik quantifier or an e/eme/ezen type demonstrative
act as definite noun phrases (in ways to be specified below); i.e., -ik quantifiers
and demonstratives also seem to play the role of a definite determiner. The default
definite determiner, the definite article a/az, is only spelled out – presumably in the
head position of a DP projection – if the noun phrase has no quantifier determiner
or demonstrative determiner – as in (6a) – or if the quantifier or the demonstrative
determiner it has is not the highest element in the noun phrase but is buried, for
example, under a non-finite restrictive relative clause adjoined to QP or DemP
(7a,b).
(6) a.
b.

[DP a [NumP két [NP fiú]]]
the
two boy
* [DP a [QP mindegyik [NP fiú]]]
the each
boy

c.

* [DP az [DemP ezen [NP fiú]]]
the
this
boy

but:
(7) a.

b.

[DP a [QP Marinak bemutatott [QP mindegyik fiú]]]
the Mary-DAT introduced
each
boy
‘each boy introduced to Mary’
[DP a [DemP tőled
kapott [DemP eme levél]]]
the
you-from received
this letter
‘this letter received from you’

To capture the fact that QPs and DemPs behave like DPs, we can assume that
they always project a DP, and the quantifier or the demonstrative must be raised
from Spec,QP/Spec,DemP into Spec,DP – presumably to check the [+definite]
feature of the D head. Once Spec,DP is filled by movement, the D head cannot
be spelled out (owing to the economy principle also active in the NumP). In (7b)
the movement from Spec,QP to Spec,DP is blocked by the intervening participial
clause.3 Third person personal pronouns and proper names are also DPs; they may
involve movement from N to D.

3

Noticing that the definite article in e.g. (7a,b) does not change the referential properties of
the noun phrase, Szabolcsi (1983b, 1992a, 1994a) concludes that the definite article is not
a determiner. She claims it to be a complementizer-like element, a subordinator, whose
function is to turn a nominal expression into the argument of a predicate. At the same time,
it also carries the feature [+definite] or [−definite]. The definite subordinator is spelled
out as a/az, whereas the indefinite one is phonetically null (the so-called indefinite article,
egy ‘an/one’, being in fact a numeral). The article projects a DP. A noun phrase appearing
in a sentence is syntactically always a DP; however, phonologically the DP projection can
be vacuous. It is not only the indefinite article that is phonologically empty; the definite
article is also deleted if it is immediately followed by a determiner (whether a contentful
determiner or another definite article belonging, for example, to a genitive specifier).

The noun phrase

7.2

155

Evidence for the different noun phrase projections

The categorial distinction between predicative noun phrases (NPs), indefinite noun phrases (NumPs), and definite noun phrases (DPs) is supported by
semantic, morphosyntactic, syntactic, and lexical evidence. These noun phrase
types have different semantic functions: NPs denote properties, NumPs denote individuals identified by a property, whereas DPs denote individuals identified (more
or less) uniquely. Definite and indefinite noun phrases also behave differently on
the morphosyntactic level: only DP objects trigger the presence of a visible object
agreement marker on the V (see Section 3.5.2).
NPs, NumPs, and DPs also have different distributions across sentence positions.
Although NPs, i.e., bare singulars, can represent any argument of a predicate,
including its subject, they are barred both from postverbal argument positions and
from the topic position. They can only occur in the operator slots: Spec,AspP, Spec,
FP, and Spec,DistP (compare Section 3.2). Non-specific NumPs (for example, bare
plurals) are only barred from the topic position (compare Section 2.5).4 (Generic
plurals and mass terms have a definite article in Hungarian; hence, they can be
topicalized and predicated about.)
As was discussed in Section 2.5, predicates may subcategorize for the category
of their noun phrase complement. Thus, predicates with the meaning component
‘(come to) exist/appear’ – e.g. van ‘is’, születik ‘is born’, keletkezik ‘arise’, alakul
‘is formed’ – or with the meaning component ‘cause to (come to) exist/appear’ –
e.g. készı́t ‘prepare’, rajzol ‘draw’, főz ‘cook’, kap ‘receive’ – require their theme
to be a mere NP or a non-specific NumP. These predicates assert the existence, or
coming into being, of their theme; that is why their theme cannot be expressed by a
noun phrase carrying an existential presupposition – as happens in (8d) and (9b).5
(8) a.

b.

Született sok gyerek.
was.born many child
‘Many children were born.’

c.

Születettek gyerekek.
were.born children
‘Children were born.’

d.

4
5

Született egy gyerek.
was.born a child
‘A child was born.’

* Született a gyerek/mindegyik gyerek/eme gyerek.
was.born a child /each
child /this child
‘The child/each child/this child was born.’

This observation is due to Alberti (1997b).
For details, see Szabolcsi (1986) and É. Kiss (1995c).

156

The syntax of Hungarian

(9) a.

Kaptunk egy dı́jat /sok dı́jat /dı́jakat.
we.got a prize/many prize/prizes
‘We got a prize/many prizes/prizes.’

b.

* Kaptuk a dı́jat /mindegyik dı́jat /ezen dı́jat.6
we.got the prize/each
prize/this prize
‘We got the prize/each prize/this prize.’

Minden ‘every’ phrases functioning as objects trigger the subjective conjugation
of the V, i.e., they must be NumPs; still verbs requiring a non-specific theme do
not accept them as their theme:
(10) a. * Született minden gyerek.
was.born every child
‘Every child was born.’

b.

* Kaptunk minden dı́jat.
we.got every prize-ACC
‘We got every prize.’

The reason for the ungrammaticality of (10a,b) must be that minden is an inherently
specific numeral (after all, it always refers to a set already present in the universe
of discourse).
There are also predicates requiring that their arguments be represented by a DP
or a specific NumP. Such are predicates expressing a state; compare:
(11) a. * Szeretnek lányok operákat.
love
girls operas-ACC
‘(Some) girls love (some) operas.’
6

Example (9b) can also be grammatical – provided the verb is focussed, in which case the
main assertion is other than the assertion of the theme’s coming into being:
(i)

KAPTUK a

dı́jat,
nem KÁRTYÁN NYERTÜK.
got-we the prize-ACC not cards-at won-we-it
‘We GOT the prize, we did not WIN it at CARDS.’

The indefiniteness effect is, in general, neutralized if the sentence contains a focus; for
example:
(ii)

TAVALY kaptuk a

dı́jat.
last.year got-we the prize-ACC
‘We got the prize LAST YEAR.’

It also saves the sentences if the verb is supplied with a perfectivizing suffix – presumably
because in that case the main assertion is the completion of the event of the theme’s
coming into being:
(iii)

Meg született a

gyerek.

PERF was.born the child

‘The child has been born.’
(iv)

Meg kaptuk az üzenetet.
PERF got-we the message-ACC

‘We have got the message.’

The noun phrase
b.

157

A lányok szeretik az operákat.
the girls love
the operas
‘Girls love operas.’

In view of these facts it seems expedient to distinguish categorially different noun
phrase types; after all, NPs, NumPs, and DPs not only have different referring
functions but also figure in various morphological, morphosyntactic, and syntactic
operations and constraints.

7.3

The possessive construction

7.3.1

The facts

In the Hungarian possessive construction, the possessive relation is marked primarily on the possessed noun: it bears a suffix indicating its possessedness,
and it may also bear an agreement marker, matching the person and number of
the possessor. The possessor can bear a dative suffix, or can be caseless. The
presence versus absence of dative case on the possessor, and the presence versus
absence of agreement on the possessed noun, interact with the syntactic structure
of the possessive construction in an intricate way. Here are the essential facts to
be accounted for:
The dative-marked possessor either occupies the initial position in the extended
projection of the possessed noun (12a), or it is external to it, sitting among the
complements of the matrix verb, on a par with the projection of the possessed
noun (12b). (The latter pattern is referred to as the cleft possessive construction.)
(12) a.

b.

Jánosnak a könyv-e
John-DAT the book-POSS
‘John’s book’
Jánosnak ellopták a könyvét.
John-DAT stole-they the book-POSS-ACC
‘John’s book was stolen.’

The caseless possessor cannot leave the projection of the possessed noun:
(13) a.

János könyv-e
John book-POSS
‘John’s book’

b. * János ellopták a könyvét.
John stole-they the book-POSS-ACC
‘They stole John’s book.’

158

The syntax of Hungarian

Whereas the dative-marked possessor precedes the definite article of the possessed
noun, the caseless possessor usually blocks the spelling-out of the article of the
possession (14a). The article is spelled out in two cases. Its presence is obligatory
when the caseless possessor is represented by a personal pronoun (14b), and it is
optional when it is represented by a personal name (14c). A caseless possessor
always follows the article of the possession.
(14) a.

Magyarország fővárosa
Hungary
capital-POSS
‘Hungary’s capital’

b.

az ő könyve
the he book-POSS
‘his book’

c.

(a) János könyve
(the) John book-POSS
‘(the) John’s book’

Most speakers reject a pronominal possessor in pattern (12a) as a dative-marked
possessor internal to the projection of the possessed noun:
(15)

?* Csak (én)nekem a könyvem
veszett el.
only I-DAT
the book-POSS-1SG lost
VM
‘Only my book got lost.’

As for the morphosyntax of possession, the possessed noun bears a possessive
suffix and often also an additional agreement suffix corresponding to the person
and number of the possessor. The possessive suffix and the agreement suffix are
fused in many cases. However, in the case of a plural possessed noun they are clearly
distinct; they are separated by the plural marker. (The plural marker of possessed
nouns (-i) happens to be different from the regular -k plural marker.) That is:
(16)

az én diák -ja -i -m
the I student-POSS-PL-1SG
‘my students’

a mi diák -ja -i -nk
the we student-POSS-PL-1PL
‘our students’

a te diák -ja -i -d
the you student-POSS-PL-2SG
‘your students’

a ti diák -ja -i -tok
the you student-POSS-PL-2PL
‘your students’

az ő diák -ja -i -0
the he student-POSS-PL-3SG
‘his students’

az ő diák -ja -i -k
the he student-POSS-PL-3PL
‘their students’

Notice that the 3rd person plural personal pronoun (ők ‘they’) loses its -k plural
marker when used as a caseless possessor, which some of the (anti)agreement

The noun phrase

159

theories to be discussed below attribute great significance to. The principal target
of these theories is the phenomenon that the agreement marker of the possession
is missing if the possessor is represented by a lexical noun phrase. Since the
3rd person singular agreement marker is phonologically empty, the absence of
agreement becomes evident only in the case of a plural lexical possessor, which
would trigger the -k agreement marker:
(17) a.

a fiú könyv-e -i
the boy book -POSS-PL
‘the boy’s books’

b.

a fiúk könyv-e -i
the boys book -POSS-PL
‘the boys’ books’

Agreement between the lexical possessor and the possessed noun is optional in
the cleft pattern:
(18)

A fiúknak elvesztek a könyv-e
-i -(k).
the boys-DAT got.lost the book -POSS -PL-3PL
‘The boys’ books got lost.’

In the Minimalist approach of Bartos (1999a) the possessedness marker and the
agreement marker surrounding the plural suffix on the possessed noun are analyzed
as the heads of the functional projections PossP and AgrP, respectively. Relying on
the Mirror Principle of Baker (1985), according to which morphological derivation
is the mirror image of syntactic derivation, Bartos argues that PossP immediately
dominates NP, and AgrP immediately dominates NumP. Consider the relevant
section of the extended noun phrase projection:
…

(19)

AgrP

…

Agr

NumP
Num

PossP
Poss

NP
N

-m

-i-

-e-

könyv

1SG

PL

POSS

book

L

könyveim
my books

160

The syntax of Hungarian

The structure in (19), again, should be conceived as three dimensional. Agr,
Num, and Poss surface on the right-hand side of the N because each of them is
marked as suffixal, which means that it must right-adjoin to the lexical head of its
complement.

7.3.2

Relating the caseless and the dative possessor

A crucial question that a description of the Hungarian possessive construction must answer is how to relate the three possible realizations of the possessor: the caseless possessor, the -nak/nek-marked possessor internal to the extended
projection of the possessed noun, and the cleft -nak/nek-marked possessor. As
Szabolcsi (1992a) first argued, the three possessor types are realizations of the
same unspecified theta role, assigned to the possessor by the possessed noun. The
possessed noun, consisting of a noun and a possessedness suffix, is an argumenttaking head, denoting a referent that bears an unspecified relation to an individual
(the possessor). If the noun combined with the possessedness suffix is a theta-role
assigner in itself, e.g. it is a deverbal noun denoting an action, then the possessor
will have the specific theta role determined by the noun. In such cases the possessedness suffix only plays a role in licensing the case of the possessor.7 The
fact that the three types of possessors share the same theta role suggests that they
originate in the same position.
The ‘standard’ theory of the Hungarian possessive construction, elaborated
by Szabolcsi (see Szabolcsi 1981b, 1983b, 1992a, 1992b, 1994a, Szabolcsi and
Laczkó 1992, etc.), is based on the insight that the relation between the possessor and the possession is both functionally and formally similar to the relation
between the subject and the predicate. The possessor bears the same agreement
relation to the possessed noun that the subject bears to the verb, and it is assigned
the same nominative case by nominal inflection that the subject is assigned by
verbal inflection. The role of Tense is played by the Poss(essedness) element in
the nominal domain. Every noun phrase is associated with an inflection complex
containing a [+/−Poss] element, and, like [+Tense], [+Poss] is accompanied by
agreement.
In this theory, the primary realization of the possessor is the apparently caseless variant. If we interpret Szabolcsi’s theory on structure (19) (which is an
updated version of her original proposal), then the possessor is generated in
Spec,PossP, where it also receives its theta role. It bears a phonologically null

7

On the theta role of the possessor, see Szabolcsi (1992a, 1994a, etc.) and Alberti (1995).

The noun phrase

161

nominative case, which is assigned/checked by Poss. Then the possessor moves
on to Spec,AgrP, the surface position of nominative possessors. The nominative possessor in Spec,AgrP is predicted to follow the definite article and to
precede every other determiner and numeral – correctly, as is demonstrated in
(20a,b):
(20) a.

a te minden szavad
the you every word-POSS-2SG
‘your every word’

b.

János ezen szavai
John this word-POSS-PL
‘these words of John’

Szabolcsi assumes a phonological rule deleting the definite article followed by another determiner. D-deletion takes places whatever the structural relation between
the two adjacent determiners is, and whichever type the second determiner represents. Hence, when the nominative possessor has a determiner of its own, it will
delete the definite article of the possessed noun (21a). The definite article of the
possessed noun may in fact also be missing when the possessor has no visible determiner of its own; e.g. it is absent in front of a determinerless geographical name
(21b). It can also be missing in front of a possessor represented by a personal name;
thus, (21c) is perhaps even more common than the variant with an article. Szabolcsi
claims that geographical names and, optionally, personal names too have a zero determiner, which is, however, visible for the determiner of the possessed noun, and
deletes it.
(21) a.

0 [ezen fiú] könyve
this boy book-POSS
‘this boy’s book’

b.

0 [0 Budapest] hı́djai
Budapest bridge-POSS-PL
‘the bridges of Budapest’

c.

0 [0 János] ezen szavai
John this word-POSS-PL
‘these words of John’

A nominative possessor in Spec,AgrP can move on into Spec,DP, where it assumes
a -nak/nek operator marker (22). (Szabolcsi claims that this -nak/nek is other than
the dative case suffix. The suffix -nak/nek also serves un-case-like purposes in
Hungarian, such as marking modifiers in left dislocation, e.g. Boldog-nak boldog
vagyok ‘Happy I am’.)

162

The syntax of Hungarian

(22)

DP
D'

Spec
D

AgrP
Agr'

Spec
Agr

NumP
Num'

Spec

PossP

Num

Poss'

Spec
Poss

NP
N

Jánosi-nak a
John

the

ti

-0

két

ti

two

-a-

fison

L

Jánosnak a két fia
‘John’s two sons’

The -nak/nek-marked possessor in Spec,DP is correctly predicted to precede both
the article and the quantifiers/numerals of the possessed noun, without causing the
deletion of the matrix D.
If D plays the same role in the nominal domain as C plays in the sentence,
then Spec,DP must also be a functional equivalent of Spec,CP, serving as an
(intermediate) landing site for operators. The operator position status of Spec,DP
is said to be confirmed also by the observation that possessors with an inherent
operator feature, e.g. wh-phrases and quantifiers, are somewhat marked when left
in Spec,AgrP, bearing a null nominative case. A wh-phrase in Spec,AgrP sounds
particularly archaic; Szabolcsi even marks it as ungrammatical; compare:

(23) a. ? Ki könyve
van az asztalon?
who book-POSS is the table-on
‘Whose book is on the table?’
b.

Kinek
a könyve
van az asztalon?
who-DAT the book-POSS is the table-on
‘Whose book is on the table?’

The noun phrase

163

(24) a.(?) Mindenki könyve
az asztalon van.
everybody book-POSS the table-on is
‘Everybody’s book is on the table.’
b.

Mindenkinek a könyve
az asztalon van.
everybody-DAT the book-POSS the table-on is
‘Everybody’s book is on the table.’

The facts in (23)–(24), however, do not clearly support the claim that Spec,DP
filled with the -nak/nek-marked possessor is an operator position. The whole of
the subject of (23) occupies Spec,F(ocus)P – the location of wh-phrases – and
the whole of the subject of (24) occupies Spec,DistP – the location of universal
quantifiers – i.e., the operator feature of the possessor percolates up to the matrix
noun phrase in both cases, and causes it to move into a position where the given
operator feature can be checked. The mild (or, for some speakers, significant)
acceptability difference between the (a) and (b) sentences in (23) and (24) suggests
merely that the operator feature of the possessor can percolate up to the matrix
noun phrase more easily from Spec,DP than from Spec,AgrP. Contrary to what
Szabolcsi’s theory predicts, it is not necessary for a possessor to have an operator
feature to be able to land in Spec,DP and to assume a -nak/nek operator marker.
Any possessor of any noun phrase can occupy Spec,DP (unless it is a personal
pronoun; compare (15)).
Spec,DP – like Spec,CP – serves as an escape hatch: a possessor raised into
Spec,DP and supplied with -nak/nek can be extracted into the domain of the matrix
verb. In the following pair of examples the possessor is generated in Spec,PossP,
where it has its nominative case checked, and – after passing through Spec,AgrP –
it moves on to Spec,DP. Then it is extracted into the matrix VP (25a), where it may
undergo topicalization (25b).
(25) a.

b.

Jánosnaki ]
Elveszett [DP ti a [ti pénze ]
got.lost
the money-POSS John-DAT
‘John’s money got lost.’
Jánosnaki elveszett [DP ti a [ti pénze] ti ]

Szabolcsi’s basic claim – that the three types of possessors derive from the same
underlying structure – has been generally accepted. At the same time, some of her
specific proposals have been challenged. For example, her analysis of the -nak/nek
suffix as an operator marker is not supported by independent evidence. It is not
plausible that a language that has no operator markers on the sentence level should
have one on the noun phrase level and, what is more, this operator marker should
be identical with the dative case ending.
Demonstratives of the ez/az type represent a further problem for this theory. Ez/az
stands in a pre-article position in the noun phrase, and it agrees in number with the

164

The syntax of Hungarian

head noun, also sharing its case – an accusative in (26a). One of the open questions is
the position of ez/az. The only pre-article position in Szabolcsi’s theory is Spec,DP,
which, however, is taken by the -nak/nek possessor; see, for example, (26b). Furthermore, an ez/az occupying Spec,DP should bear the -nak/nek operator marker
assigned (or checked) in Spec,DP instead of sharing the case of the matrix NP.
(26) a.

b.

ezeket
a könyveket
these-ACC the books-ACC
‘these books-ACC’
a fiúnak ezt
a könyvét
the boy-DAT this-ACC the book-POSS-ACC
‘this book-ACC of the boy’

The use of ez/az in possessive constructions is also restricted in unexplained ways.
A possessed noun can only have an ez/az-type demonstrative if the possessor
bears the -nak/nek ending; compare (26b) and (27a). A possessor, too, can only be
associated with ez/az if it is a possessor marked by -nak/nek (27b,c).
(27) a. * ezt
a fiú könyvét
this-ACC the boy book-POSS-ACC
‘this book of the boy’
b. * ez a fiú könyvét
this the boy book-POSS-ACC
‘this boy’s book’
c.

ennek a fiúnak a könyvét
this-DAT the boy-DAT the book-POSS-ACC
‘the book of this boy’

An adequate analysis of the possessive construction should also account for the
facts illustrated in (26b) and (27).
Seeking to eliminate the problems listed above, den Dikken (1999a) proposes
the following account of the nominative–dative alternation. The primary variant
is the -nak/nek-marked possessor, whose suffix is the regular dative case ending,
employed for the encoding of the possessor theta role in many languages. Possession is claimed to be expressed universally by means of a predication structure, in
which the possessor is predicated of the possessum, as follows:
(28)

[SC POSSESSUM [PP Pdat POSSESSOR]]

The possessor receives its theta role in the dative PP. The dative P has two allomorphs. It can be overt, in which case it is spelled out as -nak/nek. It can also
be null, in which case it must meet a licensing condition, as a consequence of
which the PP will undergo Predicate Inversion (see den Dikken 1995: Chapter 3).

The noun phrase

165

(English Dative Shift is claimed to be the output of the same Predicate Inversion
rule.) Predicate Inversion yields a construction of the following type (disregarding
agreement for the time being):
(29)

[DP a [FP [PP Pe János]i F [SC kalap ti ]]]
the
John
hat

(FP, whose specifier position the caseless possessor occupies, means ‘functional
projection’, which can presumably be identified with the PossP projection of structure (19).) If the dative P is realized as an overt -nak/nek suffix, then the -nak/nekmarked possessor is preposed from the predicate position of the small clause
directly into Spec,DP.
The dative-marked possessor is also the primary variant in the approach of
É. Kiss (2000a). It is generated as a post-head complement of the possessed noun –
contrary to den Dikken (1999a), and similar to Szabolcsi (1992a, etc.). As for the
caseless variant, it is argued that certain types of arguments can not only be realized
as post-head complements but can also appear as specifiers or modifiers. When
realized as complements, they are licensed by a case or a preposition merged with
them. As specifiers or modifiers, they need different categorial features – e.g. the
modifiers of nouns are typically of the category AdjP. Certain types of adjuncts
display a similar categorial alternation in post-head and prehead position. Thus, in
the (b) examples in (30)–(33) the prenominal arguments and adjuncts either lack
their K or P, or have it buried under an AdjP:
(30) a.
b.

a student [PP of chemistry] [PP with long hair] →
a [long-haired] [chemistry] student

(31) a.

egy papı́rvágó
kés [KP ébenfából] →
a paper.cutting knife ebony-from
‘a paper knife of ebony’

b.

(32) a.

b.

(33) a.

egy [ébenfa] papı́rvágó
kés
an ebony paper.cutting knife
‘an ebony paper knife’
tüntetés [PP a megszállás ellen] →
demonstration the occupation against
‘demonstration against the occupation’
[AdjP [PP a megszállás ellen] -i] tüntetés
the occupation against-ADJ demonstration
‘demonstration against the occupation’
harc [KP a függetlenségért] →
fight
the independence-for
‘fight for independence’

166

The syntax of Hungarian
b.

[AdjP [KP a függetlenségért] való] harc
the independence-for being fight
‘fight for independence’

The dative possessor–caseless possessor alternation is claimed to be of the same
kind. That is, the possessor argument can be licensed either as a complement or as
a specifier – i.e., it can be generated either in the complement position, or as the
specifier of the N + Poss complex. It will need a Case (a Dative) only in the former
case. Dative case serves to denote the unspecified theta role that the complement
of a possessed noun bears to its head.
Let us assume that the possessor, which uniquely identifies the possessum, has a
[+determiner] feature. The possessum is of the category DP, whose [+determiner]
head attracts the possessor into its checking domain. A caseless lexical possessor, generated in Spec,PossP, is moved into Spec,DP in order to check the
[+determiner] feature of D. If Spec,DP is filled, D will remain phonologically
empty owing to economy requirements (compare Dimitrova-Vulchanova 1998);
for example:
DP

(34)

Spec

D'
NumP

D

Num'

Spec
Num

PossP
Spec

Poss'

DP Poss

NP
N

Péteri

-i

Peter

PL

ti

-ja-

diák

POSS

student

L

Péter diákjai
Peter’s students

AgrP is believed to play no role in the derivation, since lexical possessors – unlike
pronominal possessors – do not bear an agreement marker. Thus, (35a,b) represent
a minimal pair: the 3rd person pronoun has a phonologically null agreement suffix,

The noun phrase

167

whereas the lexical noun phrase does not have any:
(35) a.

az ő diák -ja -i -0
the he student-POSS-PL-0
‘his students’

b.

a Péter diák -ja -i
the Peter student-POSS-PL
‘Peter’s students’

The presence of the phonologically null agreement suffix in (35a) is supported by
the fact that the construction is part of a paradigm of overt agreement suffixes;
compare:
(36)

az én diák -ja -i -m
the I student-POSS-PL-1SG
‘my students’

a mi diák -ja -i -nk
the we student-POSS-PL-1PL
‘our students’

a te diák -ja -i -d
the you student-POSS-PL-2SG
‘your students’

a ti diák -ja -i -tok
the you student-POSS-PL-2PL
‘your students’

az ő diák -ja -i -0
the he student-POSS-PL-3SG
‘his students’

az ő diák -ja -i -k
the he student-POSS-PL-3PL
‘their students’

The claim that the possession of a singular lexical possessor, e.g. that in (35b),
does not bear a zero agreement suffix is supported by two pieces of evidence. First,
the 3rd person plural agreement marker is the phonologically salient -(u)k – see
(36) – and it is also absent in the case of a plural lexical possessor. Compare the
following minimal pair:
(37) a.

b.

az ő diák -ja -i -k
the he student-POSS-PL-3PL
‘their students’
a fiúk diák -ja -i
the boys student-POSS-PL
‘the boys’ students’

Bartos (1999a) also found a second argument for the different morphological makeup of pronominal and lexical possessors. In coordinated possessive constructions
the shared possession of a lexical possessor and a 1st or 2nd person pronominal
possessor can undergo Right Node Raising, whereas the shared possession of a
3rd person pronoun and a 1st or 2nd person pronoun cannot do so:
(38) a. ? a Péter és a te diákjaid
the Peter and the you student-POSS-PL-2SG
‘Peter’s and your students’

168

The syntax of Hungarian
b. * az ő és a te diákjaid
the he and the you student-POSS-PL-2SG
‘his and your students’

In (38a) Right Node Raising is possible because, although the two possessed nouns
to be represented by the same element are not identical (diák-ja-i versus diák-jai-d), at least one subsumes the other. In (38b), on the other hand, the two possessed
nouns cannot be identified because they contain conflicting agreement morphemes
(diák-ja-i-0 versus diák-ja-i-d).
If lexical possessors have no agreement suffix, then presumably they do not
pass through an AgrP projection; in fact, they do not even activate an AgrP. AgrP
is only projected if the possessor has a person feature that needs checking, i.e.,
if it is a personal pronoun. The pronominal possessor moves from Spec,PossP to
Spec,AgrP, as follows:
(39)

[DP [D a [AgrP tei [Agr -d [NumP -i- [PossP ti [Poss -ja- [NP diák]]]]]]]]

The pronominal possessor in Spec,AgrP apparently has its [+determiner] feature
checked by merging into D.8 Although first it lands in the specifier position of
AgrP, it consists of a mere head (a D); this is why it is able to proceed into the
checking domain of the matrix D. The possibility of a head category in non-head
position merging into a head immediately preceding it has been demonstrated by
Dobrovie-Sorin (1993) in connection with Romance clitics. The operation of head
merge assumed by her is reanalysis-like in that it does not change the linear order
of the adjacent heads involved. That is, (39) is mapped on (40):
(40)

[DP [D a + tei [AgrP ti [Agr -d [NumP -i- [PossP ti [Poss -ja- [NP diák]]]]]]]]
→ a te diákjaid
the your students

For those who allow the article of the possessed noun to be spelled out also in front
of a possessor represented by a personal name, personal names can also undergo
feature checking via head merge; after all, they are also mere heads (Ns raised to
D position). That is:
(41)

[DP [D a + Péteri [NumP -i- [PossP ti [Poss -ja- [NP diák]]]]]] → a Péter diákjai
the Peter’s students

Apparently, the dative-marked possessor also has a [+determiner] feature to
check because it also has to be preposed into the checking domain of D. The
specifiers of functional projections extending the noun phrase are not open to KPs
8

The possibility of feature checking via head merge has been argued for by Alexiadou and
Anagnostopoulou (1998).

The noun phrase

169

and PPs (unlike the specifiers of clause-level functional projections). Therefore, the
dative-marked possessor cannot land in Spec,DP; it can check its [+determiner]
feature only in a DP-adjoined position. A constituent adjoined to DP does not
block the spelling-out of the determiner:
[DP Péterneki [DP a [NumP -i [PossP -ja- [NP diák ti ]]]]] → Péternek a diákjai
Peter-DAT the students
‘Peter’s students’

(42)

Under these assumptions, the ungrammaticality of (15), containing a dative-marked
pronominal possessor, can also be accounted for. If the pronominal possessor is
realized as a dative-marked complement, it can move on from post-nominal position only to a DP-adjoined position, the specifiers of the intervening functional
projections not being available to a KP. That is, it cannot pass through Spec,AgrP
to have its [+person] feature checked. A possessor can only land in Spec,AgrP if
it is caseless. A caseless possessor moved to Spec,AgrP and then merged with D,
on the other hand, is not a possible target of adjunction to DP.
The distribution of ez/az, the case-marked demonstrative – problematic for
the theory of Szabolcsi (1992a, 1992b, etc.) – also becomes more predictable
under these assumptions. Consider again the relevant examples. To make it more
transparent whether the demonstrative modifies – and shares the case of – the
possessor or the possession, the possession will be in the accusative.
The demonstrative modifier of the possessed noun cannot co-occur with a lexical
possessor consisting of a D/Num + NP sequence:
(43) a. * a
kisfiú ezt
a barátját
the boy this-ACC the friend-POSS-ACC
‘this friend of the boy-ACC’
b. * ezt
a kisfiú barátját
this-ACC the boy friend-POSS-ACC
‘this friend-ACC of the boy’
compare:
c.

a kisfiúnak ezt
a barátját
the boy-DAT this-ACC the friend-POSS-ACC
‘this friend-ACC of the boy’

A caseless possessor constituted by a personal name, on the other hand, can
marginally follow a demonstrative, similarly to a possessor constituted by a personal pronoun:
(44) a. ? ezt
a Mari barátját
this-ACC the Mary friend-POSS-ACC
‘this friend-ACC of Mary’s’

170

The syntax of Hungarian
b.

ezt
a te barátodat
this-ACC the you friend-POSS-2SG-ACC
‘this friend-ACC of yours’

If we assume, following Kenesei (1992) and Bartos (1999a), that the az/ez demonstrative is generated in Spec,DP, then the only unexpected property of az/ez is that
it requires the presence of a definite article in D, i.e., it is an exception to the principle ‘Economize functional heads’. It follows that (43a,b) are ungrammatical – as
their Spec,DP is doubly filled. In (43c), and (44a,b), on the other hand, Spec,DP
is open for ez: in (43c) the possessor is adjoined to DP, whereas in (44a,b) it is
merged with D.
Recall the other demonstrative-related constraint to be accounted for: the possessor can have a demonstrative modifier of its own only if it is in the dative;
compare:
(45) a. * ez a lány barátját
this the girl friend-POSS-ACC
‘this girl’s friend-ACC’
b.

ennek a lánynak a barátját
this-DAT the girl-DAT the friend-POSS-ACC
‘this girl’s friend-ACC’

Bartos (2001) argues on the basis of independent considerations that ez/az must
always be case-marked. This constraint explains why (45a) is ungrammatical:
the possessor which ez modifies, and whose case it should share, is caseless.
(Notice that an independently used ez cannot function as a caseless possessor either:
*ez szı́n-e ‘the colour of this’.)

7.3.3

Agreement and anti-agreement in the possessive construction

The fact that only a pronominal possessor agrees with the possessed noun,
and that a lexical possessor does not, is seen by Szabolcsi (1992a) and den Dikken
(1999a) as a phenomenon analogous to the anti-agreement effect attested in the
Welsh sentence. In fact, the Hungarian data include an additional complication.
Whereas a lexical possessor referring to a plurality of possessors does bear a plural
suffix, a 3rd person plural pronominal possessor lacks the plural marker expected:
it is non-distinct from a singular 3rd person pronoun. Consider the relevant data
again:
(46) a.

az ő diák -ja -i -0
the he student-POSS-PL-0
‘his students’

a professzor diák -ja -i
the professor student-POSS-PL
‘the professor’s students’

The noun phrase
b.

az ő diák -ja -i -k
the he student-POSS-PL-3PL
‘their students’

171

a professzoro-k diák -ja -i
the professor -PL student-POSS-PL
‘the professors’ students’

Den Dikken (1999a) applies Rouveret’s account of Welsh anti-agreement (Rouveret 1991) to Hungarian. Recall that in den Dikken’s theory of the Hungarian
possessive construction the caseless possessor is preposed into Spec,PossP. Den
Dikken assumes that it does not move on from there to Spec,AgrP. The pronominal
possessor is capable, nevertheless, of establishing an agreement relation with the
Agr head via head movement. A crucial element of this explanation is the assumption that pronominal noun phrases project a NumP – unlike lexical noun phrases,
which project a DP. The abstract Num head is claimed to require licensing via
movement to a higher head. A Num embedded in a DP is licensed by raising to D.
This is what happens in the case of lexical possessors in the possessive construction. The head of a pronominal possessor, on the other hand, has no D head to be
raised to, hence it raises to Agr. That is:
(47)

[DP az [AgrP Agr + Numn [PossP [NumP tn [NP pro/ő]] [Poss Poss . . . diák . . .]]]]

Den Dikken does not split a possessedness morpheme off the agreement morpheme
(given that they are fused in many cases), i.e., he places the -ja suffix under the Agr
head, and analyzes the -juk 3rd person plural suffix as Agr merged with Num. The
fact that a 3rd person plural pronominal possessor lacks the usual -k plural marker
is seen as prima facie evidence of Num-to-Agr movement: it is the -k missing on
the pronoun that appears in Agr.
In case Spec,PossP is occupied by a lexical possessor, Agr is realized as a default
3rd person singular -ja – whether the possessor is in the singular or in the plural.
Whereas a caseless lexical possessor does not reach Spec,AgrP in the projection,
a dative-marked possessor skips it, moving directly to Spec,DP. Agr is realized as
the default -ja in this case, too.
Despite its apparent success, some of the premises on which den Dikken’s theory is built seem problematic. First, as was argued above, in Hungarian NumPs
and DPs trigger different agreement paradigms on the V (DPs trigger the objective
conjugation, including a definite object agreement marker; NumPs, on the other
hand, trigger the subjective conjugation); hence, DPs and NumPs can easily be told
apart. First and 2nd person pronominal objects trigger the indefinite conjugation,
so they are indeed NumPs; 3rd person pronouns, however, clearly act like DPs:
they require the objective conjugation. Bartos (1999a) also has a morphological
argument against den Dikken’s theory: he claims that the -juk ending on the possessed noun cannot be the combination of the -ja- suffix and the -k plural suffix,
which would yield -jak. In fact, it is the regular phonological realization of the -japossession marker plus the -uk 3rd person plural agreement marker sequence.

172

The syntax of Hungarian

The explanation of anti-agreement advocated by Bartos (1999a) and Szabolcsi
(1992a, etc.), adopted from traditional descriptive literature, is nonetheless problematic. It is an explanation based on economy, stating that the plurality of the
possessor can be marked only once: either on the head or on the possessor – but
not on both. What it fails to explain is why plurality is marked on the possessor
when the possessor is lexical, and why it is marked on the possessed noun when
the possessor is pronominal – and not the other way round, for example. Furthermore, such redundancies are accepted in the language in other cases – e.g. a
plural subject, whether pronominal or lexical, takes a verb with a 3rd person plural
agreement marker.
Den Dikken (1999a) also provides an explanation of the optional agreement
attested between a cleft lexical possessor and the possessed noun (compare (18)
above). Consider the facts again:
(48) a.

b.

A fiúknak ellopták a labdá-já -t.
the boys-DAT stole-they the ball -POSS-ACC
‘The boys’ ball was stolen.’
A fiúknak ellopták a labdá-j
-uk -at.
the boys-DAT stole-they the ball -POSS-3PL-ACC
‘The boys’ ball was stolen.’

(49) a. * Nekik ellopták a labdá-já -t.
they-DAT stole-they the ball -POSS-ACC
‘Their ball was stolen.’
b.

Nekik ellopták a labdá-j
-uk -at.
they-DAT stole-they the ball -POSS-3PL-ACC
‘Their ball was stolen.’

In den Dikken’s theory a -nak/nek-marked lexical possessor moves from its original
small clause position directly to Spec,DP, without passing through Spec,Agr. If
this is, indeed, the case then it is expected not to participate in agreement. This
is what we attest in (48a). Only a pronominal possessor triggers agreement with
the possessed noun; hence, the noun phrase with the agreeing possessum in (48b)
must contain a null pronominal possessor. Den Dikken concludes that in (48b) the
dative lexical noun phrase extracted into the VP domain is coindexed with a null
resumptive pronoun, instead of a trace.

7.3.4

The non-specific possessive construction

As was argued in Section 7.3.2, the possession, uniquely identified by the
possessor, projects a DP. The [+determiner] feature of the D head attracts the posses
sor, which must be raised to the domain of D – whether it is expressed by a caseless

The noun phrase

173

or dative-marked noun phrase. The caseless possessor lands in Spec,DP, whereas
the dative-marked possessor is adjoined to DP. Indeed, an object constituted by a
possessive construction containing a caseless or a dative-marked possessor always
triggers the objective verb conjugation. (As was argued in Section 3.5.2, a definite
object requires the presence of a -(j)a/-j(a)/i object agreement marker on the V.
The agreement marker triggered by an indefinite object is phonologically empty.)
Observe (50). (Since it is crucial that the possessor be internal to the object noun
phrase, the object is preposed into Spec,FP, which takes a single constituent.)
(50)

Csak [DP egy diáknak [DP [NumP két [PossP dolgozatát ]]]] talált-a /
only
one student’s
two
papers-ACC found-DEF/
* talált-0
jutalomra méltónak a zsűri.
* found-INDEF of.prize worthy the jury
‘The jury found only one student’s two papers worthy of a prize.’

In the possessive construction in (50) both the possessum and the possessor are
indefinite; still, the noun phrase is of the category DP, triggering the objective
conjugation.
Section 7.2 enumerated several verbs – those with the meaning component
‘(cause to) (come to) exist’ – which require that their theme argument be represented by a non-specific NumP or an NP. Does that mean that these verbs do not
allow their theme to be expressed by a possessive construction? Let us check:
(51) a.

Született Marinak egy gyereke.
was.born Mary-DAT a child
‘A child was born to Mary.’

b. * Csak Marinak egy gyereke született.
only Mary-DAT a child was.born
‘Only a child to Mary was born.’
c.

Csak Marinak született egy gyereke.

Születik ‘be born’ is a verb requiring a non-specific argument. Example (51a) seems
to suggest that it also accepts a possessive construction as its subject. However, this
possessive construction fails the constituency test in (51b): it cannot be squeezed
into the focus slot of the sentence. Evidently the possessor and the possessum
are independent constituents in (51a) and (51c) alike. That is, if an argument is
required to be represented by a non-specific noun phrase, its possessor, if any, must
be external to it. It is clear why. The non-specific noun phrase cannot project a DP
to harbor a possessor. A caseless possessor cannot survive in a position other than
Spec,DP. A dative-marked possessor, on the other hand, is also viable on its own –
it is not ruled out by the Case Filter. Therefore, it must be extraposed.

174

The syntax of Hungarian

A dative-marked possessor – similar to the non-possessor complement of a
nominal head – cannot remain in a post-head complement position. It must undergo
obligatory extraposition, presumably because its case-marking would interfere
with the case-marking of the matrix noun phrase. That is, a constraint of the
following type must be at work in Hungarian:
(52)
a.
b.

The Case Constraint
The case suffix must cliticize to the right edge of the noun phrase.
The case suffix cannot cliticize to a K or a P.

A case-marked possessor is subject to extraposition also when it is represented by
a phonologically empty pro. Szabolcsi (1994a) based this claim on the following
evidence. A possessive construction can be coordinated with a [–poss] noun phrase
(53a). In (53b) the same coordinate structure is ungrammatical. The explanation
for its ungrammaticality is that the pro possessor has been removed from one of
the conjuncts, thus violating the coordinate structure constraint:
(53) a.

Vizes lett
a kalapod
és a sál.
wet became the hat-POSS-2SG and the shawl
‘Your hat and the shawl became wet.’

b. * Van kalapod
és sál.
is hat-POSS-2SG and shawl
‘There is a hat of yours and a shawl.’

With the possessor removed, the possessum in (51a,c) need not project a category
higher than NumP. As the examples in (54), containing a plural lexical possessor,
indicate, the possessum can optionally also agree with its extracted possessor,
i.e., it is allowed to project an AgrP, as well, with a null resumptive pronoun in
Spec,AgrP:
(54) a.

b.

A fiúknak két kabátja van.
the boys-DAT two coat-POSS are
‘The boys have two coats.’
A fiúknak két kabátjuk
van.
the boys-DAT two coat-POSS-3PL are
‘The boys have two coats.’

The structure assigned to the possessed noun phrase of (54b) is represented in (55)
below. Apparently a noun phrase required to be non-specific can merge with any
functional head up to Agr. The functional projections obligatorily associated with
the feature [+specific] are QP, DemP, and DP.
(55)

[AgrP proi [Agr -uk [NumP két [PossP ti [Poss -ja [NP kabát]]]]]]

The noun phrase

175

The pro in Spec,AgrP is the phonologically empty equivalent of the Caseless 3rd
person plural pronoun ők ‘they’. The difference between the pro forced to leave the
non-specific noun phrase in (53b), and that allowed to stay in it in (54b)/(55) is that
the latter only has person and number, without also having Case, and represents
an intermediate chain link, coindexed with a ‘hanging topic’.
As Szabolcsi (1992a, 1992b) pointed out, the so-called verbs of possession in
Hungarian are none other than the existential van ‘be’ and nincs ‘not be’ taking a
subject with a possessor; for example:
(56) a.

A fiúknak van pénze.
the boys-DAT is money-POSS
‘The boys have money.’

b.

A fiúknak van pro pénzük.
the boys-DAT is pro money-POSS-3PL
‘The boys have money.’

c.

Nekem nincs pénzem.
I-DAT isn’t money-POSS-1SG
‘I have no money.’

The existential verbs require a non-specific subject (similar to the English there
is. . .), hence when their subject has a possessor, it is obligatorily extraposed,
and always bears the -nak/nek dative suffix. The traditional analysis of the socalled possession verbs as two-place predicates taking a nominative and a dative
complement is untenable – in part because it cannot explain why the alleged coarguments can agree with each other.

7.4

Non-possessor arguments in the noun phrase

7.4.1

The subject and object of the verbal stem in event noun phrases

Whereas most nouns are incapable of assigning a theta role in themselves, without merging with a Poss head, deverbal nouns denoting a complex
event preserve the theta role assigning capability of their verbal stem. Confirming Grimshaw’s results (1990), Laczkó (1985, 1990, 1995a), Szabolcsi (1992b,
1994a), and Szabolcsi and Laczkó (1992) argue that Hungarian deverbal nouns
derived by the suffix -ás/és under a complex event interpretation are associated
essentially with the same theta-grid as their verbal stems. (This does not hold for
deverbal nouns derived by -ás/és under the result reading.) The argument structure
of the verbal stem, nevertheless, is realized in a modified form in the corresponding
noun phrase – partly because the extended nominal projection provides only one
structural Case, and partly because the Case Constraint prevents the possibility of
post-nominal complements and adjuncts.

176

The syntax of Hungarian

Whereas in the extended VP there are two structural Cases available for the
encoding of arguments – Nominative and Accusative – in the extended NP only
a single non-inherent case can be assigned – the Dative (provided the noun head
is merged with Poss). Thus, in the case of an event nominal derived from a verb
taking a mere subject, the subject is realized as a possessor; for example:
(57) a.
b.

Mari énekel.
Mary sings
Mari(nak az) éneklése
Mary(DAT the) singing-POSS
‘Mary’s singing’

When nominalizing a transitive verb, the object is expressed as the possessor, and
the agent subject can optionally appear as an által ‘by’ phrase:
(58) a.
b.

Mari el énekli a dalt.
Mary VM sings the song-ACC
a dal(nak) (Mari által való) eléneklése
the song(DAT) (Mary by being) singing
‘the singing of the song by Mary’

(Való is originally a participial form of the verb van ‘be’, which has been grammaticalized as an adjectivalizer turning the argument or adjunct of an event nominal into
a premodifier.9 ) The expression of the subject is not always optional; a non-human
agent or experiencer, or a force often cannot be omitted upon nominalization;
compare:
(59) a.

b.

(60) a.

b.

9
10

A betegek méh által való megcsı́pése veszélyes.
the sick
bee by being stinging-POSS dangerous
‘The stinging of the sick by a bee is dangerous.’
A betegek megcsı́pése veszélyes.
the sick
stinging-POSS dangerous
‘The stinging of the sick is dangerous.’
Hallatszik a szél(nek a) fújása.
is.heard the wind-DAT the blowing-POSS
‘The blowing of the wind can be heard.’
Hallatszik a fújás.10
is.heard the blowing
‘The blowing can be heard.’

For details, see Laczkó (1995b).
The examples and the argumentation have been adopted from Szabolcsi (1994a).

The noun phrase

177

The non-human subject of the verb stem (whether agent, force, or experiencer)
cannot be omitted in the course of nominalization because if it is omitted, the
missing subject is reconstructed as [+human]. Thus, a betegek megcsı́pése in
(59b) can only mean the stinging of sick people by humans. The missing argument
in (60b), too, can only be reconstructed as a person instead of the wind.
Szabolcsi and Laczkó (1992) and Szabolcsi (1994a) explain this fact as follows.
In the case of an event nominal, the external argument of the verbal stem not
expressed lexically must be realized as a PRO. The PRO argument of a noun, just
like that of a verb, is either controlled by a matrix argument – as happens, for
example, in (61b) – or is interpreted as PROarb .
(61) a.

b.

Bı́zom a beteg gyógyulásában.
I.trust the patient’s recovery.in
‘I trust in the patient’s recovery.’
Bı́zom a gyógyulásban.
I.trust the recovery.in
‘I trust in the recovery.’

The control of the PRO argument of a nominal head is possible only in the
presence of an appropriate ‘control’ predicate such as elkezd ‘start’, folytat ‘continue’, befejez ‘finish’, abbahagy ‘stop’, megtagad ‘refuse’, un ‘be bored with’,
etc. None of these predicates happens to be able to control the force PRO of
an event nominal. There being no potential controller either in (59b) or in (60b),
only a PROarb reading is possible. PROarb , however, is known to require a
[+human] interpretation universally – hence its referent cannot be identified with
a bee.
A further question is where the invisible PRO argument is located. In the noun
phrase structure proposed by Szabolcsi and Laczkó (1992) and Szabolcsi (1994a)
there is no room for a PRO argument, hence they suggest that PRO is realized
merely in the lexicon without appearing in syntax. The noun phrase structure
proposed in the previous sections of this chapter does in fact provide room for a
PRO argument. It is plausible to assume that PRO has an underspecified [+person]
feature, hence it triggers the projection of an AgrP, whose specifier it occupies,
checking the underspecified [+person] feature of Agr.

7.4.2

Oblique arguments and adjuncts

The lexically case-marked arguments and adjuncts of the nominal head
would be expected to follow the head (as also happens in the verb phrase) – if the
Case Constraint were not in effect. Since the Case Constraint in (52) blocks this
possibility, there are two options left: the argument or adjunct must be realized

178

The syntax of Hungarian

as a modifier, or it must be extraposed. (These are the options that are also available for the adjuncts of nouns denoting other than complex events.) Extraposition is in fact not completely free; there must be some kind of (ill-understood)
compatibility between the extraposed complement and the argument structure
of the matrix verb. Extraposition is easier with adjuncts than with arguments;
compare:
(62) a. ? [A beszélgetés ti ] nagyon tetszett
a művésznőveli .
the interview
very.much pleased.me the artist-with
‘The interview with the artist pleased me very much.’
b.

[A művésznővel való beszélgetés ti ] nagyon tetszett
a TV-beni .
the artist-with
being interview
very.much pleased.me the TV-in
‘The interview with the artist on the TV pleased me very much.’

The regular, fully productive way of legitimizing a lexically case-marked complement is to insert it into an adjectival phrase headed by való or történő, or by
some other contentful participle. This is what happens to the complement of the
noun beszélgetés ‘interview’ in (62b), while its adjunct is extraposed. Observe
the structure attributed to a noun taking a complement or adjunct formulated as a
premodifier. Only one of the two adjacent definite articles is pronounced.11 It is an
open question whether the argument in premodifier position, or the PRO assumed,
binds a trace in complement position.
DP

(63)

D

AgrP
NP

Spec

NP

AdjP
KP
a
the

PRO a

muvésznovel
˝
˝

the artist-with

Adj
való

beszélgetés

being

interview

‘the interview with the artist’

Arguments and adjuncts of the category PP can also be adjectivalized by being
inserted into an AdjP headed by the suffix -i, to be cliticized to P:

11

This phonological rule is a limited version of the D-deletion rule proposed by Szabolcsi
(1992a, Szabolcsi and Laczkó 1992). This rule is triggered only by two adjacent definite
articles.

The noun phrase

179

DP

(64)

DP

KP
D

PossP
Poss

NP
NP

AdjP
Adj
DP
[az egyháznak]i a
the church-DAT the

-a

N

PP

KP

P

ti
-i gyengék mellett kiállás
by
standing
weak

→ az egyháznak a gyengék melletti kiállása
‘the church’s espousal of the weak’

Certain lexically case-marked arguments can apparently also precede the head
noun without being adjectivalized:
(65) a.

b.

a piacra
menés
the market-to going
‘the going to market’
az ágyban fekvés
the bed-in lying
‘the lying in bed’

These arguments are heads incorporated into the verb prior to nominalization; i.e.,
the noun phrases in (65a,b) have been derived by the nominalization of complex
N + V units. Whereas a lexically case-marked argument does not lose its case
ending, an incorporated object undergoes nominalization without its accusative
case ending:
(66) a.

b.

7.5

János újságot
olvas.
John newspaper-ACC reads
‘John is newspaper-reading’
János újságolvasása
John newspaper-reading-POSS
‘John’s newspaper-reading’

Summary

Three different noun phrase projections have to be distinguished in
Hungarian syntax: the NP, a lexical projection with a predicative function; and

180

The syntax of Hungarian

its extensions by operators expressing various quantifying-identifying functions,
the indefinite NumP and the definite DP. The three noun phrase projections have
different distributions across sentence positions and across predicate types, and
also figure in various syntactic and morphosyntactic constraints. (For example, the
object triggers a definite object agreement on the V if and only if it is represented
by a DP.)
The possessive relation is marked primarily on the possessum – by a possessedness suffix – and in cases where the possessor is a pronominal, also by an Agr
marker. The possessor can be realized as a dative-marked complement or as a
caseless determiner. The Case-assigner of the dative possessor is the possessedness suffix, whereas its theta-role assigner is the possessed noun + possessedness
suffix complex. The possession, uniquely identified by the possessor, projects a DP.
The caseless possessor moves to Spec,DP, whereas the dative-marked possessor
is adjoined to DP in order to check the [+determiner] feature of D. A pronominal possessor checks the [+determiner] feature of D by merging into the article
realizing D.
The full possessive construction is always definite. An argument required by the
subcategorization properties of its predicate to be non-specific can only be represented by a possessive construction if the possessor is extraposed. The so-called
possession sentence of Hungarian contains the verb van ‘be’ and an obligatorily
non-specific subject with its dative-marked possessor extraposed.
The argument-taking capabilities of nominal heads are limited. Event nominals
derived from verbs can keep only one of their arguments marked with a structural
case, which will be realized as a possessor. The subject of a nominalized transitive
verb can only be expressed as a by-phrase or as a controlled or arbitrary PRO. Arguments in oblique cases and adjuncts can join the nominal head as adjectivalized
premodifiers, or under appropriate circumstances they can be extraposed.

8

The postpositional phrase
8.1

Restricting the category of postpositions

In traditional Hungarian grammars postpositions form a large and varied
class, including postpositions taking a noun phrase complement with a lexical case
(1a), idiomatic participles taking a noun phrase complement with a lexical case
(1b), and postpositions taking a caseless noun phrase complement (1c).
(1) a.

Jánossal együtt
John-with together
‘together with John’

b.

termetére
nézve
on.his.stature looking
‘concerning his stature’

c.

János mellett
John near
‘near John’

As Marácz (1986a, 1989) noted, the presence versus absence of lexical case on
the complement of the postposition correlates with another property: a postposition taking a caseless noun phrase complement – e.g. that in (2c) – may bear an
agreement marker corresponding to the person and number of its complement.
Postpositions taking a case-marked complement, e.g. those in (2a,b), on the other
hand, cannot be combined with an agreement suffix.1
(2) a.

1

együtt
veled
with.you together
‘together with you’

Marácz (1986a, 1989) analyzed the apparently caseless noun phrase complement of postpositions to be in the nominative. He noticed that the lack of lexical case on the complement correlates with the presence of agreement on the postposition, which led him to the
conclusion that the complement without a case suffix bears nominative case licensed by
inflection.
181

182
b.

The syntax of Hungarian
rád
nézve
on.you looking
‘concerning you’
but:

c.

te mellett-ed
you near-2SG
‘near you’

The categories illustrated in (1a), (1b), and (1c) differ not only in the presence
or absence of a case suffix on their complement, and in the presence or absence
of an agreement marker on their head. In type (1a) the order of the head and
the complement can be reversed; in type (1b) and (1c), on the other hand, this is
impossible:
(3) a.
b.
c.

együtt Jánossal
* nézve termetére
* mellett János

Furthermore, degree adverbs modifying phrases of type (1a) immediately precede
the head of the phrase, whereas those modifying phrases of type (1c) precede
the whole construction. Phrases of type (1b) do not usually tolerate an adverb of
degree, but if they accept one, it is adjoined to the whole construction; compare:
(4) a.

b.

Jánossal teljesen együtt
John-with completely together
‘completely together with John’
* teljesen Jánossal együtt

(5) a.

* januártól
egészen kezdve
January-from quite beginning

b.

egészen januártól kezdve
‘beginning quite from January’

(6) a.

* János pontosan mellett
John exactly next.to

b.

pontosan János mellett
‘exactly next to John’

The different status of the three types of postpositions becomes particularly clear
if their noun phrase complement is supplied with a demonstrative:
(7) a.

azzal
a fiúval
együtt
that-with the boy-with together
‘together with that boy’

The postpositional phrase
b.

attól
a perctől
kezdve
that-from the minute-from beginning
‘since that minute’

c.

az alatt a fa alatt
that under the tree under
‘under that tree’

183

Whereas the postposition in (7c), taking a caseless complement, is copied both
on the demonstrative and on the head noun, the postpositions in (7a,b), taking a
complement with a lexical case, are spelled out only once.2
These heterogeneous properties make it highly questionable that the elements
illustrated in (1a–c) are representatives of one and the same syntactic category. In
fact, the type of postpositions illustrated in (1a) do not differ in any significant
respect from adverbs; to all appearances they are adverbs taking an argument.
Együtt ‘together’, when occurring without an argument, is analyzed as an adverb
in traditional grammars. The fact that it is occasionally complemented with an
overt noun phrase should not affect its categorization.3 The handful of idiomatic
participles, on the other hand, do not differ in any significant respect from participles proper. Even though they must follow their complement (compare (3b)),
this is a consequence of the fact that their complement occupies verb modifier
2

This fact was observed and interpreted as evidence of the Kase-like status of postpositions
with a caseless complement by Kenesei (1992).
3
There is a single problem case: képest ‘compared to’. It is adverb-like in that it cannot
bear an agreement marker; it requires a noun phrase complement in the allative case (see
(i)–(ii)); and it is not spelled out twice when merging with a noun phrase containing a
demonstrative (iii). On the other hand, unlike adverbs of type (1a), it cannot precede its
complement (iv), and cannot be separated from it by a modifier (v).
(i)

hozzám képest
to.me compared
‘compared to me’

(ii)

Jánoshoz képest
John-to compared
‘compared to John’

(iii)

ahhoz a fiúhoz képest
that-to the boy-to compared
‘compared to that boy’

(iv)

* képest
Jánoshoz
compared John-to

(v)

* Jánoshoz egészen
képest
John-to completely compared

We can predict all these properties if we categorize képest as an adverb obligatorily
incorporating its complement.

184

The syntax of Hungarian

position, as usually happens in the case of idioms. Therefore, in the present analysis the elements illustrated in (1a) are analyzed as adverbs, those illustrated in
(1b) are categorized as participles, and the class of postpositions is restricted to
the elements illustrated in (1c).

8.2

The formal properties of postpositional phrases

8.2.1

Distribution

If we exclude from the category of postpositions both heads taking a noun
phrase with a lexical case, and participles, then we arrive at a syntactically homogeneous class of entities, including: alá ‘to under’, alatt ‘under’, alól ‘from under’,
elé ‘to before’, előtt ‘before’, elől ‘from before’, felé ‘towards’, felől ‘from’, fölé
‘to above’, fölött ‘above’, fölül ‘from above’, köré ‘round’, körül ‘around’, közé
‘between’, között ‘in between’, közül ‘from between’, által ‘by’, ellen ‘against’,
ellenére ‘despite’, helyett ‘instead of’, szerint ‘according to’, iránt ‘towards’,
miatt ‘because of’, nélkül ‘without’, után ‘after’, végett ‘because of’, and révén
‘by means of’. These postpositions take a caseless noun phrase complement (1c),
which they follow (3c), and to which they are adjacent (6a,b). If their complement
is pronominal, they bear an agreement marker (2c).
The order and the strict adjacency of the postposition and its complement seem
reminiscent of the relation of a noun phrase and its case ending, which constitute
a word. The prosody of PPs is also similar to that of KPs: the postposition, like a
case ending, is unstressed. At the same time, however, coordinated PPs also allow
the ellipsis of either the postposition or the complement, which is impossible in
the case of coordinated KPs; compare:
(8) a.

b.

(9) a.

b.

a ház előtt és a ház mögött
the house before and the house behind

→ a ház előtt és mögött
the house before and behind
‘before and behind the house’

* a háztól
és a házból
→ * a háztól
és -ból
the house-ABLATIVE and the house-ELATIVE the house-ABLATIVE and ELATIVE
‘from inside and from outside the
house’
a ház előtt és a garázs előtt
the house before and the garage before

→ a ház és a garázs előtt
the house and the garage before
‘before the house and the garage’

* a háznál
és a garázsnál
→ * a ház- és a
the house-ADESSIVE and the garage-ADESSIVE
the house and the
garázsnál
garage-ADESSIVE
‘at the house and the garage’

The postpositional phrase

185

The ellipsis attested in (8a) and (9a) does not, in fact, refute the morphosyntactic
wordhood of the noun phrase + P unit. Compounds and even derived words consisting of a stem and a sufficiently heavy suffix may allow word-internal ellipsis
under certain conditions; for example:
(10) a.

orvosképzés
és -továbbképzés
doctor-education and continuing-education
‘doctors’ training and continuing training’

b.

orvos- és bábaképzés
doctor and midwife-education
‘doctors’ and midwives’ training’

c.

feleség- és anyaként
wife
and mother-ESSIVE
‘as wife and mother’

The crucial difference between a noun phrase + P combination and a noun phrase
+ K combination seems to be that the wordhood of the latter also extends to
the level of morphophonology. Whereas the vowel quality of postpositions is
invariable, case endings have developed allomorphs, and participate in vowel
harmony.
Following Grimshaw (1991), van Riemsdijk (1998), and, with respect to Hungarian, Payne and Chisarik (2000), let us assume that postpositions, similar to
cases, are functional (or semi-lexical) heads extending a noun phrase, relating its
referent to the predicate semantically, hence enabling the noun phrase to function
as an argument or adjunct. The analysis of the PP as a functional extension of
the noun phrase is supported by the fact that the clause-internal position of a PP
is determined by the referential properties of its noun phrase complement. For
example, just as a bare NP is excluded from a postverbal argument position (see
the discussion of the ‘referentiality effect’ in Section 3.2), an NP dominated by a
PP cannot stand there either; it must be preposed into the preverbal section of the
sentence:
(11) a. * A gyerekek elbújtak farakás
mögé.
the children hid
wood-stack behind
b.

Az egyik gyerek FARAKÁS MÖGÉ bújt (el), a másik gyerek BOKOR MÖGÉ.
the one child wood-stack behind hid (VM) the other child bush behind
‘One of the children hid BEHIND A WOOD-STACK, the other one, BEHIND A BUSH.’

The parallelism between the syntactic position of K and that of P in the extended
noun projection is also evident in their parallel behavior when merging with a
noun phrase containing a demonstrative. Both a P and a K must be copied on the
demonstrative, as well:

186

The syntax of Hungarian

(12) a.

ennél
a háznál
this-ADESSIVE the house-ADESSIVE
‘at this house’

b.

8.2.2

e mellett a ház mellett
this near the house near
‘near this house’

Agreement and anti-agreement phenomena

If the complement of the postposition is a personal pronoun, then the
postposition will bear an agreement marker. Apparently, a pronominal complement
has a person feature to check, and therefore the PP must project an AgrP. Observe
the full paradigm:
(13)

én mellett-em
I near -1SG
‘near me’

mi mellett-ünk
we near -1PL
‘near us’

te mellett-ed
you near -2SG
‘near you’

ti mellett-etek
you near -2PL
‘near you’

ő mellett-e
he near -3SG
‘near him’

ő mellett-ük
he near -3PL
‘near them’

The inflection appearing on the P is identical with the inflection appearing on
the possessed noun in the case of a pronominal possessor. Compare the possessive
agreement paradigm, repeated in (14), with the postpositional agreement paradigm
in (13). Not only are the suffixes the same, but there is also no plural -k suffix on
the 3rd person plural pronominal complement/possessor.
(14)

az én nev -em
the I name-POSS-1SG
‘my name’

a mi nev -ünk
the we name-POSS-1PL
‘our name’

a te nev -ed
the you name-POSS-2SG
‘your name’

a ti nev -etek
the you name-POSS-2PL
‘your name’

az ő nev -e
the he name-POSS-3SG
‘his name’

az ő nev -ük
the he name-POSS-3PL
‘their name’

Recall that possessive inflection consists of a possessedness suffix and an agreement marker sometimes fused, sometimes – e.g. in the plural – kept apart;
compare:

The postpositional phrase
(15)

az én nev -e -i -m ‘my names’
the I name-POSS-PL-1SG

a mi nev -e -i -nk
the we name-POSS-PL-1PL

a te nev -e -i -d
the you name-POSS-PL-2SG

a ti nev -e -i -tek
the you name-POSS-PL-2PL

az ő nev -e -i -0
the he name-POSS-PL-3SG

az ő nev -e -i -k
the he name-POSS-PL-3PL

187

The identity of the two inflection paradigms would suggest that the postposition
also bears both a possessedness suffix and an agreement marker. However, if the
postposition and its complement would, indeed, realize a possessive relation, then
the possessedness suffix should also be present on the postposition in the case of a
non-pronominal, lexical possessor. In the case of a lexical complement, however,
the postposition bears no suffix. Compare a lexical possessor–possession relation
with a noun phrase–postposition relation:
(16) a.

Péter nev -e
Peter name-POSS
‘Peter’s name’

b.

Péter mellett
Peter near
‘near Peter’

In fact, as Marácz (1986a) noted, the possessedness marker can also appear on a
postposition with a complement other than a personal pronoun – but only if the
possessor has been extracted:
(17) a.

b.

Kinek
futottál után-a?
who-DAT ran-you after-POSS
‘Whom did you run after?’
A fiúknak szép
jövő áll
előtt -ük.
the boys-DAT beautiful future stands ahead-POSS-3PL
‘A beautiful future is ahead of the boys.’

As in the case of possessive constructions, agreement between the extracted complement and the postposition is optional. Thus, in addition to (17b), (18) is also
possible, in which the postposition bears a possessedness suffix without an agreement marker:
(18)

A fiúknak szép
jövő áll
előtt -e.
the boys-DAT beautiful future stands ahead-POSS
‘A beautiful future is ahead of the boys.’

If we extend the analysis of the possessive construction to PPs, the non-agreeing
pattern in (18) is an instance of plain extraction. Example (17b), on the other
hand, contains a pro possessor (the trigger of agreement), and a hanging-topic-like
lexical possessor generated outside the possessive construction, and coindexed
with pro.

188

The syntax of Hungarian

Let us attempt to assign to the different types of Hungarian postpositional phrases
structures from which their properties discussed in Sections 2.1 and 2.2 follow
without any stipulations.

8.3

The structure of the postpositional phrase

A postpositional phrase extending a lexical noun phrase is assigned the
following structure:
PP

(19)

DP

P
D

NP

mellett

a

fiúk

near

the

boys

The assumed underlying order has been constructed in observance of the principle
that syntactic heads precede their complements. That is, the PP is syntactically
a prepositional phrase; P will turn into a postposition only in the morphological
component. Traditionally, the noun phrase complement of a postposition is assumed to be preposed into Spec,PP. That approach, however, could not account
for the case-suffix-like properties of the Hungarian postposition; for example, it
could not explain its behavior in constructions of type (12b), involving a P taking
a noun phrase modified by a demonstrative, in which the postposition is copied
both on the demonstrative and on the head noun. Therefore, we will rather extend
the analysis of case projections (KPs) proposed by Bartos (1999a) to postpositional phrases. We will assume – in the spirit of Minimalism – that the syntactic
relation of a P and its noun phrase complement is a non-linearized relation in
abstract space. It becomes linearized with the P following the noun phrase as a
consequence of the [+suffix] feature of P, which corresponds to the linearization
command ‘right-adjoin to the lexical head of the projection’. The feature [+suffix]
of the postposition also accounts for the invariable surface order and the obligatory
adjacency of the noun phrase complement and the postposition. In this framework,
both P and K(ase) share the same [+suffix] morphosyntactic feature, and the closer
unity of the noun phrase + Kase sequence is of a morphophonological nature.
A P with a pronoun or pro complement bears an agreement suffix. From a Minimalist perspective, if the PP is extended into an AgrP, the [+person] feature of

The postpositional phrase

189

Agr must be checked against that of a pronoun. (Recall from the discussion of
agreement in the noun phrase in Section 7.3.3 that we attribute a [+person] feature
only to personal pronouns.4 ) As was pointed out above, the agreement marker of
postpositions with a pronominal complement is also merged with a possessedness
suffix. This is particularly clear in 3rd person singular, where the agreement suffix
is null, and the -(j)a/(j)e morpheme appearing on the P is the bare possessedness
suffix. (The -ja/je appearing on 3rd person singular verbs in the definite conjugation, on the other hand, is the object agreement marker.) The possessedness suffix,
capable of assigning/licensing dative case and a theta role, does not appear to play
a syntactic or semantic role in this case (the noun phrase receives its theta role
from P, and it does not need a case word-internally). Therefore, let us assume
that the presence of the possessedness morpheme is merely phonologically motivated: given that the agreement and possessedness morphemes (not separated by
a plural suffix) are fused phonologically, the presence of one also brings about
the presence of the other. Syntactically, however, Agr and Poss represent a single
projection. That is, we assign to a PP containing a pronominal complement, e.g.
to én mellettem ‘near me’, the following structure:
AgrP

(20)

Agr'

Spec

PP

Agr
P

NumP

-em

mellett

én/pro

1SG

near

I

L

(én)mellettem
near.me

The [+suffix] features of Agr and P result in a complete reversal of the underlying
order represented in (20). (That is, in the proposed approach, the pronoun does not
move overtly to Spec,AgrP.)
Historically, the postpositions under investigation were all case-marked nouns,
expressing relative location, used in genitive constructions (meaning ‘at the head
4

For a different analysis of the distribution of agreement across Hungarian PP types, see
Ackerman (1987). In his analysis, the agreement marker appearing on the postposition
in the case of a pronominal complement is the incorporated pronoun itself. This account
can explain the lack of agreement in the case of a lexical complement, but has difficulties,
for example, with the cleft PP, whose head always bears inflection, whether its removed
complement is lexical or pronominal; see (17)–(18) above.

190

The syntax of Hungarian

of . . . , at the bottom of . . .’, etc.). They developed their [+suffix] feature after
their locative case-ending had become obsolete. According to the evidence of the
cleft PP construction illustrated in (17)–(18), the [+suffix] feature is still not an
obligatory attribute of them. They can also be marked as [–suffix], in which case
their complement needs case; the PP must, therefore, be extended into a PossP
projection so that Poss can assign dative case to the complement of P; that is:
PossP

(21)

Poss

PP
P
[-suffix]

-e

KP

elott
˝

a fiúknak

before

the boys-DAT

The Case Constraint forces the KP complement to be adjoined to PossP, from
where it can be extracted into the matrix syntactic domain (22a). If the head of the
cleft PP projects an AgrP as well, in addition to PossP, then the complement of P
must be represented by a pro, coindexed with a PP-external dative noun phrase.
This is how the ‘agreeing’ variant of the cleft PP construction is derived (22b).
(22) a.

b.

A fiúknaki szép
jövő áll
[PossP ti [PossP előtt -e ti ]]
the boys-DAT beautiful future stands
ahead-POSS
‘A beautiful future is ahead of the boys.’
jövő áll
[AgrP proi [PossP előtt -ük]]
A fiúknaki szép
the boys-DAT beautiful future stands
ahead-POSS.3PL
‘A beautiful future is ahead of the boys.’

The complement of P is extraposed if either the complement or the remnant PP is
intended to play an operator role in itself. In (17) the complement of P, a wh-phrase,
has been focussed; in (22) it has been topicalized. Most often the complement of
P is extracted so that the remnant PP, consisting of a mere head, can function as a
verb modifier; for example:
(23) a.

b.

[AspP [ti Utána]
futottam a fiúknaki ]
after-POSS ran-I
the boys-DAT
‘I ran after the boys.’
[AspP [proi Utánuk]
futottam a fiúknaki ]
the boys-DAT
after-POSS-3PL ran-I
‘I ran after the boys.’

The postpositional phrase

191

The construction in (21), containing a [–suffix] postposition combined with a
Poss morpheme, is acceptable in present-day Hungarian only if the dative-marked
complement of P is extraposed:
(24) a. * A fiúknak előtte
szép
karrier áll.
the boys-DAT before-POSS beautiful career stands
‘The boys have a beautiful career ahead of them.’
compare:
b.

A fiúk előtt szép karrier áll.

The fact that a P can be analyzed as a [–suffix] head only in a context that excludes
the possibility of a [+suffix] analysis may follow from economy considerations.

8.4

PPs as verb modiﬁers

If the referential complement of the postposition has been extracted, the
remnant PP can be assigned a [+V(erb)M(odifier)] feature. The assignment of a
[+VM] feature to a postposition is very common, but is subject to a constraint;
compare (25), (26), and (27). In the case of (25), the (b) version, involving a cleft
PP with the P acting as a VM, is even more common and more unmarked than the
(a) version. In the case of (26), the (b) version is slightly marked, whereas in the
case of (27) it is totally impossible.
(25) a.

b.
(26) a.

b.
(27) a.

János a cél mellé lőtt.
John the target beside shot
‘John shot beside the target.’
János mellé
lőtt a célnak.
John beside-POSS shot the target-DAT5
János Mari mellett állt.
John Mary by
stood
‘John stood by Mary.’
János mellette
állt Marinak.
John beside-POSS stood Mary-DAT
János futott Mari mellől.
John ran Mary near-from
‘John ran from Mary.’

b. * János mellőle
futott Marinak.
John near-from-POSS ran Mary-DAT
5

The -e possessedness suffix is only morphosyntactically present; phonologically it is fused
with the -é stem vowel.

192

The syntax of Hungarian

The PPs in (25)–(27) have different theta roles. That in (25) expresses a goal, that in
(26) expresses a location, whereas that in (27) expresses a source. Interestingly the
adverbs unambiguously identified as verb modifiers by native speakers – ki ‘out’,
be ‘in’, le ‘down to’, fel ‘up to’, el ‘away’, át ‘across’, rá ‘onto’, ide ‘to here’,
oda ‘to there’, össze ‘together’, vissza ‘back’, szerte ‘apart’, szét ‘apart’, etc. –
also all denote a goal in their primary meaning (even if this fact cannot always
be expressed by their English translations). The verb modifier status of adverbs
expressing location such as kint ‘outside’, bent ‘inside’, lent ‘down’, fent ‘up’, itt
‘here’, ott ‘there’ is less clear; some grammars include them in the class of verb
modifiers, others do not, and native speakers also hesitate as to whether to spell a
location adverb + verb sequence as one word (as must be done if the adverb is a
verb modifier), or as two words. No source adverb such as kintről ‘from outside’,
lentről ‘from down’, innen ‘from here’, onnan ‘from there’ has ever become a verb
modifier.
These facts are related to the aspectual operator function of the verb modifier.
A verb modifier raised to Spec,AspP, its canonical position, serves primarily to
specify the aspect of the action described in the VP, i.e., to express whether the
given action is to be looked upon as an action completed, or as an action in progress.
Most bare verbs denote a process; for example:
(28)

János futott.
John ran

If the V is supplemented with a goal complement, the VP also allows a perfective
interpretation – because an action with an endpoint can be looked upon as either
an action in progress or as an action completed; for example:
(29)
a.
b.

János a fa alá
futott.
John the tree to.under ran
‘John ran/has run (to) under the tree.’
‘John was running (to) under the tree.’

If the complement of the postposition is extraposed, then the remnant PP marked
as [+VM] will move to Spec,AspP, and will eventually be incorporated into the
V. If a verb incorporates its goal complement, then its interpretation becomes
unambiguously perfective. The incorporated postposition in (30a) has the same
perfectivizing effect that the regular verbal prefix has in (30b):
(30) a.

János alá
futott a fának.
John to.under-POSS ran the tree-DAT
‘John ran/has run under the tree.’

The postpositional phrase
b.

193

János oda
futott a fa alá.
John to.there ran the tree under
‘John ran/has run under the tree.’

An incorporated postposition of a location role, on the other hand, turns a VP
unambiguously progressive. Compare the following sentences:
(31) a.

b.

János fut a patak mellett, és légzőgyakorlatokat
végez.
John runs the stream near
and breathing.exercises-ACC does
‘John runs near the stream and does breathing exercises.’
János mellette fut a pataknak, és légzőgyakorlatokat
végez.
John near-POSS runs the stream-DAT and breathing.exercises-ACC does
‘John is running near the stream and is doing breathing exercises.’

Although the V fut ‘run’ denotes a process, the aspect of the VP of the first clause
of (31a) need not be progressive. The two processes in the two clauses need not
be simultaneous; they can also be consecutive – because both clauses can refer
for example to regular activities. That is, the aspect of the sentence can be general
imperfective rather than progressive.6 The incorporated location adverb in (31b),
on the other hand, anchors the process in space and time; hence, the sentence will
only allow a progressive interpretation. The same aspectual interpretation can also
be achieved by a regular VM expressing location, i.e., the meaning of the first
clause of (31b) is identical with that of (32):
(32)

János ott fut a patak mellett.
John there runs the stream near
‘John is running near the stream.’

An adverb or a PP of a source function does not make a good VM because aspectual
interpretation – e.g. the progressive or perfective nature of the VP – does not depend
on whether or not the starting point of the action is named. Thus, the interpretation
of the following sentences is independent of whether or not they contain a source
PP; it is determined by the presence or lack of a perfectivizing VM.
(33) a.

János futott a fa alól.
John ran the tree from.under
‘John was running from under the tree.’

b.

János el
futott a fa alól.
John away ran the tree from.under
‘John ran/has run from under the tree.’

We can summarize our observations in the form of the following generalization:7
(34)
6
7

A source constituent cannot assume a [+VM] feature.

On the imperfective and progressive aspects in Hungarian, see Kiefer (1994a).
For further details, see É. Kiss (1999a).

194

The syntax of Hungarian

8.5

Case-marked pronouns or PPs?

Hungarian personal pronouns supplied with a lexical case surface as
pro + case + agreement sequences.8 If they are set into a contrast, the pro element
is replaced by a pronoun; for example:
(35)

(36)

én + val/vel = (én)-vel-em ‘with me’
I
INSTR
(I) -with-1SG

mi + val/vel = (mi)-vel-ünk
we INSTR
(we)-with-1PL

te + val/vel = (te)-vel-ed
you INSTR
(you)-with-2SG

ti + val/vel = (ti)-vel-etek
you INSTR
(you)-with-2PL

ő + val/vel = (ő)-vel-e
he INSTR
(he)-with-3SG

ők + val/vel = (ő)-vel-ük
he.PL INSTR
(he)-with-3PL

én + nál/nél = (én)-nál-am ‘at me’
I ADESSIVE
(I)-at-1SG

mi + nál/nél = (mi)-nál-unk
we ADESSIVE (we)-at-1PL

te + nál/nél = (te)-nál-ad
ő + nál/nél = (ő)-nál-a

ti + nál/nél = (ti)-nál-atok
ők + nál/nél = (ő)-nál-uk

For traditional Hungarian grammars these forms are morphological idiosyncrasies.
However, having analyzed the syntactic behavior of PPs, we cannot fail to notice
that the strings in (35)–(36) have the same structure as postpositional phrases with
a pronominal complement. Historically, lexical case endings were, in fact, postpositions – as is demonstrated by the following fragment from Tihanyi alapı́tólevél
‘Tihany Deed of Foundation’ from 1055, in which the present-day sublative suffix
-ra/re is represented by the postposition rea:
(37)

feheruuaru rea meneh hodu utu rea
Fehérvár onto going military road onto
‘on the military road going to Fehérvár’

Towards the end of the Middle Ages such postpositions became cliticized to
the lexical head to which they were adjoined, forming a morphophonological
word with it. They became subject to vowel harmony, and started developing
allomorphs. Hungarian being a pro-drop language, a postposition attached to a
pronominal should nearly always have cliticized to a phonologically empty head,
which is obviously impossible. In such cases cliticization did not take place, and
the postposition preserved its category. That is, Hungarian has no personal pronouns bearing a lexical case; it has postpositions with a pro or pronoun complement
instead.
8

On the structure and derivation of the accusative forms of 1st and 2nd person pronouns
(engem ‘me’, téged ‘you’, minket/bennünket ‘us’, titeket/benneteket ‘you’), see den
Dikken (1999b).

The postpositional phrase

195

Lexical case endings seem to have preserved their P status in another context as
well: in PPs having their complement extraposed, functioning as verb modifiers;
compare:
(38) a.

János [AspP ért-ük
ment a gyerekekért az óvodába]
John
for-POSS-3PL went the children-for the kindergarten-to
‘John went for the children to the kindergarten.’

b.

János [AspP nek-i
szaladt egy járókelőnek]
John
into-POSS ran
a passer.by-into
‘John ran into a passer-by.’

c.

János [AspP rá
vágott a kerı́tésre]9
John
on-POSS struck the fence-on
‘John struck at the fence.’

d.

János [AspP bel-e
szólt a beszélgetésbe]
John
into-POSS spoke the discussion-into
‘John spoke in(to) the discussion.’

It is not immediately obvious if the postposition-like element in the Spec,AspP
of these sentences is a verb modifier lexically selected by the verb, or if it is
indeed a PP with an extraposed complement, assigned a [+VM] feature, and
eventually incorporated into the V in syntax. If it has been grammaticalized as a
verb modifier, then it is not expected to agree with one of its coarguments – as
it does in (38a). (Agreement is a matter internal to PP, taking place in its AgrP
projection.) Furthermore, it should not be sensitive to whether the complement
of the verb it modifies is lexical or pronominal. In fact, it cannot co-occur with a
pronominal complement; compare:
(39) a.

János rá szólt Marira.
John on called Mary-on
‘John admonished Mary.’

b. * János rá /rám szólt rám.
John on/on-1SG called on-1SG
c.

(40) a.

9

János rám szólt.
John on-1SG called
‘John admonished me.’
János hozzá vágta a labdát a fiúkhoz.
John at
threw the ball the boys-at
‘John threw the ball at the boys.’

The -a possessedness suffix is only morphosyntactically present; phonologically it is
fused with the -á stem vowel.

196

The syntax of Hungarian
b. * János hozzá/hozzájuk vágta a labdát hozzájuk.
John at
/at-3PL
threw the ball at-3PL
c.

János hozzájuk vágta a labdát.
John at-3PL
threw the ball
‘John threw the ball at them.’

The facts in (39)–(40) support the PP incorporation analysis: the VM blocks the
spelling-out of a pronominal argument obviously because the VM itself represents
the very same argument. However, there is also a fact arguing against incorporation.
Whereas in the case of regular incorporation the extraposed complement of the
postposition bears dative case, in the case under discussion – e.g. in the examples
in (38) – the complement is combined with the same morpheme that also appears
as the incorporated postposition in VM position (ért in (38a), nek in (38b), re
in (38c), be in (38d)), i.e., a kind of doubling takes place. To account for these
apparently contradictory facts, let us assume that the sentences in (38), (39a,c),
and (40a,c) all contain a PP argument complemented by a pro, which is moved to
Spec,AspP, where it is incorporated into the V. What is more, these sentences also
contain a case-marked adjunct coindexed with the incorporated PP. That is, the
goal theta role in the theta grid of, for example, (38a) is expressed by the following
pair of coindexed elements, with AgrP representing the argument proper, and KP
representing an adjunct:
…

AgrPi

(41)

Agr

Kase

PossP
PP
[+VM]

Poss

-ük

-e-

KP i

P

DP

ért

pro

-ért

DP
D

NP

a

gyerekek

értük

a gyerekekért

‘for them’

‘for the children’

This structure predicts the facts discussed above. The argument and the adjunct
instantiate the same theta role by means of the same morpheme – hence the doubling
effect. Two identical pronominals cannot enter into an appositive relation – that is
why (39b) and (40b) are ungrammatical; the adjunct is only licensed if it conveys
lexical information.

The postpositional phrase

197

There is, nevertheless, a slight problem left: when coindexed with a plural lexical
noun phrase, the 3rd person PP does not necessarily bear a plural marker:
(42) a.

b.

János nekiki
ment a járókelőkneki .
John into-POSS-3PL went the passers.by-DAT
‘John ran into the passers-by.’
János nekii
ment a járókelőkneki .
John into-POSS went the passers.by-DAT
‘John ran into the passers-by.’

(43) a. ?? János nekiki
vágta a labdát az üvegtábláknaki .
John into-POSS-3PL threw the ball the window.panes-into
‘John threw the ball against the window-panes.’
b.

János nekii
vágta a labdát az üvegtábláknaki .
John into-POSS threw the ball the window.panes-into
‘John threw the ball against the window-panes.’

The lack of the plural marker on the P is reminiscent of the lack of the plural
marker on the pronominal possessor in constructions of type (44):
(44) a.

az ő kalapjuk
the he hat-POSS-3PL
‘their hat’

According to Bartos (1999a) and Szabolcsi (1992a), the pronominal possessor
is not in the plural because its plural marker would be redundant, given that
the plurality of its referent is expressed by the plural agreement marker. Perhaps
the plurality of the 3rd person possessor in (42b) and (43b) need not be marked
on the postposition because it would also be redundant, as the plurality of its
referent is denoted on the adjunct providing the lexical content of the PP.10

8.6

Summary

In the present analysis, the class of postpositions is restricted to a set
of elements that are essentially semi-independent case endings. They form the
extended projection of a noun phrase, and – owing to their [+suffix] feature – they
10

Ackerman and Webelhuth (1997) account for the facts attested in (39)–(43) in a lexicalist
framework. They rely on the assumption that the VM + V combinations in question are
lexical expressions, and derive the lack of agreement e.g. in (43a), or the impossibility
of spelling out an independent pronoun alongside the agreeing VM, from a morphological blocking principle. According to this principle a lexical representation with a
certain information content and synthetic expression tends to block the use of an analytic
expression of a lexical representation conveying the same information.

198

The syntax of Hungarian

are spelled out right-adjoined to the noun that they extend. The noun + postposition
sequence, however, only constitutes a word on the morphosyntactic level; on the
morphophonological level the noun and the postposition represent two separate
domains for word-internal processes such as vowel harmony.
A postposition taking a personal pronoun complement is inflected, i.e., the PP
projects an AgrP. A postposition can also assume a [–suffix] feature, in which case
it takes a dative complement assigned case by a possessedness morpheme merging
with the PP. The case-marked complement of a [–suffix] P can be extraposed, and
the remnant PP can act as a VM. Postpositions expressing a goal are particularly
susceptible to the aspectualizer role associated with verb modifiers. Postpositions
of a source theta role, on the other hand, never become verb modifiers.
Lexical case endings, which were postpositions until the end of the Middle Ages,
have preserved their P status in contexts in which they have no lexical complement
to merge into; namely, in the case when their complement is a pro(noun), and in
the case when they function as verb modifiers, with their complement extraposed.

9

Non-ﬁnite and semi-ﬁnite verb phrases
9.1

Introduction

If a VP merges with an infinitival suffix instead of a finite Tense, the
resulting infinitival phrase can assume the role of a complement or adjunct in
a matrix clause. If the subject of the infinitive is controlled by an argument of
the matrix predicate, it is represented by a caseless PRO. If, on the other hand,
the matrix predicate has no argument, and therefore cannot provide an adequate
controller, the infinitive has a case-marked subject represented by a lexical noun
phrase or a pro(noun), and it also bears an agreement marker. Infinitival phrases –
whether agreeing or non-agreeing – can merge with the same types of operators
that can extend a finite VP into a predicate phrase, and they can also combine with
topic phrases into a TopP. Or, alternatively, both types of infinitives can be unified
with their matrix V into a complex predicate.

9.2

Subject and object control constructions

9.2.1

Subject and object control verbs

A number of Hungarian verbs, among them those listed under (1a,b),
are marked in the lexicon as selecting an infinitival phrase with a phonologically
empty PRO subject controlled by the matrix subject.
(1) a.

szeret ‘like’, utál ‘hate’, imád ‘adore’, elkezd ‘begin’, megpróbál ‘try’,
elfelejt ‘forget’, fél ‘be afraid’, szégyell ‘be ashamed of’, habozik
‘hesitate’, igyekszik ‘strive’, siet ‘hurry’

b.

szeretne ‘would like’, kezd ‘begin’, készül ‘prepare’, próbál ‘try’, bı́r
‘manage’, kı́ván ‘desire’, óhajt ‘wish’, mer ‘dare’, szándékozik ‘intend’,
tud ‘can’
(compare L. Kálmán et al. 1986, C. Kálmán et al. 1989)

The verbs listed under (1a) are subject control verbs whose infinitival complement
is a distinct clause-like entity – even if it is not introduced by a complementizer;
199

200

The syntax of Hungarian

for example:
(2)

János megpróbál [DistP minden hétvégén [AspP moziba menni PRO ]]
John tries
every weekend
to.cinema to.go
‘John tries to go to the cinema every weekend.’

The verbs listed under (1b) either act as subject control verbs, taking an infinitival
clause complement (3a), or form a complex predicate with their infinitive, sharing
a single set of functional projections with it (3b).
(3) a.

János szeretne [TopP a gyerekeivel [DistP minden hétvégén [AspP moziba
John would.like with.his.children every weekend
to.cinema
menni PRO]]]
to.go
‘John would like to go to the cinema with his children every weekend.’
compare:

b.

[TopP János [TopP a gyerekeivel [DistP minden hétvégén [AspP moziba szeretnei
John
with.his.children every weekend
to.cinema would.like
[VP ti menni]]]]]
to.go
‘John would like to go to the cinema with his children every weekend.’

Object control verbs are only marginally present in Hungarian grammar; lát ‘see’
and hall ‘hear’ may be their only instances; for example:
(4)

Láttam a napoti [PROi felkelni]
I.saw the sun-ACC
to.rise
‘I saw the sun rise.’

The evidence for the claim that the object of the matrix verb is the noun phrase
a napot rather than the clause a napot felkelni is semantic. Whereas (5) below, in
which a nap is inside a finite object clause, can also be true if what I saw was the
appearance of the reflection of the sunrays, (4) is true only if what I saw was the
sun itself.
(5)

Láttam, hogy felkel a nap.
I.saw that rises the sun
‘I saw that the sun was rising.’

It also argues against placing the accusative noun phrase in the embedded clause
that it cannot represent the subject of an embedded idiom. Thus, (6a) has no
idiomatic meaning:
(6) a.

b.

Láttam a szöget kibújni
a zsákból.
I.saw the nail-ACC to.come.out from.the.bag
‘I saw the nail come out of the bag.’
Kibújt a szög a zsákból.
out.came the nail from.the.bag
‘The cat is out of the bag.’

Non-ﬁnite and semi-ﬁnite verb phrases

201

On the basis of similar arguments, Tóth (2000a) concludes that the complement of
the permissive verbs hagy ‘let’ and enged ‘allow’ is an accusative with infinitive
construction rather than an object control construction; compare:
(7)

Hagytam [InfP a szöget kibújni
a zsákból]
I.let
the nail-ACC to.come.out from.the.bag
‘I let the nail come out of the bag.’

9.2.2

The inner structure of the infinitive phrase

The infinitive phrases in the control constructions under (2), (3a), and
(4) project the same types of operator phrases that finite VPs do. That is, they are
clause-like – apart from the fact that they do not merge with a complementizer.
Similar to a finite VP, the infinitival VP can be extended into an AspP, FP, NegP,
DistP, and a TopP.
The constraints determining the word order possibilities of finite clauses are also
operative in infinitival clauses. Thus, a focusless infinitive phrase cannot contain
a postverbal bare NP; it must be preposed into an operator position; compare:
(8) a.

* Mari meg próbált [InfP táncolni magas fiúval]
Mary VM tried
to.dance tall
boy-with

b.

Mari meg próbált [FP MAGAS FIÚVAL táncolni]
‘Mary tried to dance WITH A TALL BOY.’

Constituents with a morphological operator feature must also land in the specifier
position of a functional head sharing the same feature in infinitival clauses. Thus,
a verb modifier of an aspectualizer role will land in Spec,AspP (9a), a [+focus]
constituent will land in Spec,FP (9b), a negative quantifier will land in Spec,NegP
(9c), a universal quantifier will land in Spec,DistP (9d), whereas a [+referential],
[+specific] constituent can land in Spec,TopP (9e).
(9) a.

János megpróbált [AspP fel készülni a vizsgára]
John tried
up to.prepare the exam-for
‘John tried to prepare for the exam.’

b.

János megpróbált [FP A JEGYZETEIBŐL [VP készülni fel a vizsgára]]
John tried
his notes-from
to.prepare up the exam-for
‘John tried to prepare for the exam FROM HIS NOTES.’

c.

János megpróbált [NegP semmire nem [VP gondolni]]
John tried
nothing-on not
to.think
‘John tried not to think of anything.’

d.

János megpróbált [DistP mindkét vizsgára [AspP fel készülni]]
John tried
both
exam-for
up to.prepare
‘John tried to prepare for both exams.’

202

The syntax of Hungarian

e.

János megpróbált [TopP a jegyzeteiből [DistP mindkét vizsgára [AspP fel
John tried
his notes-from
both
exam-for
up
készülni]]]
to.prepare
‘John tried to prepare from his notes for both exams.’

The [+focus], [+distributive quantifier], and [+referential], [+specific] complements of the infinitive can also be raised into the corresponding specifier positions
of the matrix sentence, assuming matrix scope; for example:
(10) a.

[TopP János [FP A JEGYZETEIBŐLi [VP próbált meg [AspP fel készülni a
John
his notes-from
tried VM
up to.prepare the
vizsgára ti ]]]]
exam-for
‘It was from his notes that John tried to prepare for the exam.’

b.

[TopP János [DistP mindkét vizsgárai [AspP meg [VP próbált [AspP fel
John
both
exam-for
VM
tried
up
készülni ti ]]]]]
to.prepare
‘For both exams John tried to prepare.’

c.

[TopP A szintaxisvizsgárai [AspP meg [VP próbált János [FP A JEGYZETEIBŐL
the syntax.exam-for
VM
tried John
his notes-from
[VP készülni fel ti ]]]]]
to.prepare up
‘For the syntax exam, John tried to prepare FROM HIS NOTES.’

Even though the operator projections extending the verb phrase are identical
whether the V combines with a tense morpheme or with the non-finite -ni suffix, there is an ill-understood difference between the FPs and NegPs of finite and
non-finite sentences: in the infinitival clause the V does not have to be adjacent to
the focus or to the negative particle; the verb modifier can intervene between them.
For many speakers, the F V VM or Neg V VM orders are in fact more marked than
the F VM V and Neg VM V orders; compare:
(11) a. ? Nem tudtam KIT hı́vni meg.
not knew-I whom to.invite VM
‘I did not know whom to invite.’
b.
(12) a.

b.

Nem tudtam KIT meg hı́vni.
Szeretnék CSAK KÉT TÁRGYBÓL ı́rni
dolgozatot.
I.would.like only two subject-from to.write paper-ACC
‘I would like to write a paper ONLY IN TWO SUBJECTS.’
Szeretnék CSAK KÉT TÁRGYBÓL dolgozatot ı́rni.

Non-ﬁnite and semi-ﬁnite verb phrases

203

(13) a. ? Szeretnék nem bukni meg.
I.would.like not to.fail VM
‘I would like not to fail.’
b.

Szeretnék nem meg bukni.

An adverb of manner, canonically adjoined to AspP, can also intervene between
the focus/negative particle and the VM + V unit, which indicates that the category
with which the focus merges in such examples is an AspP; compare:
(14)

Miért szeretnél [FP CSAK SZINTAXISBÓL [AspP gyorsan [AspP le
why you.would.like only from.syntax
quickly
VM
vizsgázni?]]]
to.pass.an.exam
‘Why would you like to quickly pass an exam only in syntax?’

The fact that the focus (and the negative particle) must merge with a VP in a finite
clause, whereas it can merge either with a VP or with an AspP in a non-finite
clause is not easy to explain. The situation appears to be less problematic if the
-ni infinitival suffix is not looked upon as the spelling-out of the [–Tense] head of
TenseP, but is analyzed as a nominalizing suffix taking a [–Tense] (or tenseless)
VP/AspP. Then the infinitival phrase of the (a) examples in (11)–(13) has the
structure [InfP -ni [VP . . . ]], where that in the (b) examples, as well as that in (14)
has the structure [InfP [AspP . . .[VP . . .]]]. The focus and the negative particle will
take an InfP complement no matter whether it immediately dominates an AspP or
only a VP.

9.2.3

Long distance object agreement?

Despite its clausal nature, the infinitive phrase is transparent for object
agreement: a transitive matrix verb agrees with the object of its infinitive; compare:
(15) a.

Megpróbálok ritkábban
veszı́teni el dolgokat.
try-INDEF.1SG more.seldom to.lose VM things-ACC
‘I try to lose things more seldom.’

b.

Megpróbálom ritkábban
veszı́teni el az esernyőmet.
try-DEF-1SG more.seldom to.lose VM my umbrella-ACC
‘I try to lose my umbrella more seldom.’

c.

Megpróbállak nem el veszı́teni benneteket a tömegben.
try-2OBJ -1SGSUBJ not VM to.lose you-PL-ACC the crowd-in
‘I try not to lose you in the crowd.’

What we witness in (15a–c) is merely long distance verb–object agreement, without
any long distance accusative assignment, as well (as pointed out by Bartos 1999a).

204

The syntax of Hungarian

The infinitive is perfectly capable of accusative case assignment – as is clear from
(16), whose matrix verb is intransitive:
(16)

Sietek
felvenni a telefont.
hurry-INDEF.1SG to.pick.up the phone-ACC
‘I hurry to pick up the phone.’

In (16) the verb does not agree with the object – obviously because the intransitive matrix verb cannot project an AgrO Phrase. In fact, intransitive matrix verbs
can also apparently agree with a 2nd person object at least in the past tense;
compare:
(17)

Siettelek
meglátogatni benneteket.
hurried-2OBJ -1SGSUBJ to.visit
you-PL-ACC

As was discussed in Section 3.5.2, the -lak/lek suffix is an idiosyncratic element
in the morphological system of Hungarian; it is used in the case of a 1st person
singular subject and a 2nd person object. According to den Dikken (1999b), its
-l- element is a 2nd person object clitic cliticized to the regular -k 1st person
singular subject agreement marker, i.e., (17) is an instance of long distance clitic
movement.
Returning to (15a–c), the infinitive phrase projects no object agreement phrase;
the transitive verb selecting the infinitive phrase, on the other hand, does project
one. The primary candidate for agreement with the matrix verb is the object of
the infinitive. If it is definite, as in (15b), the matrix verb bears a definite object
agreement suffix. If it is indefinite, as in (15a), the matrix verb bears a null indefinite
object agreement marker. If it is a 2nd person indefinite object, and the matrix verb
is in the 1st person singular, long distance clitic movement takes place.
If the infinitive is intransitive, the object agreement marker on the transitive
matrix verb agrees with the infinitive phrase, which counts as an indefinite object;
for example:
(18)

Megpróbálok énekelni.
try-INDEF.1SG to.sing
‘I try to sing.’

That the object of the infinitive should take precedence over the infinitive phrase
subsuming it in triggering agreement on the matrix verb is an unexpected situation,
which represents a violation of the A-over-A principle. The problem can perhaps be
avoided if the [+definite] feature of the object of the infinitive is allowed somehow
to percolate up to InfP, turning it into [+definite].
It might also appear to be unmotivated at first sight that whereas a finite object
clause acts as a definite object, an infinitival clause is indefinite; compare:

Non-ﬁnite and semi-ﬁnite verb phrases
(19) a.

b.

205

Utálom
(azt), ha énekelsz.
hate-DEF-1SG (it-ACC) if you.sing
‘I hate if you sing.’
Utálok
énekelni.
hate-INDEF.1SG to.sing
‘I hate to sing.’

The relevant difference between the two constructions lies in the fact that the finite
clause is associated with a (pro-dropped) pronominal head, i.e., it is embedded
under a DP node; the infinitive, on the other hand, is not.

9.3

Inﬁnitival complex predicates

9.3.1

The licensing of verbal complex formation

Whereas the subject control verbs listed under (1a) treat the infinitive
phrase as one of their arguments, assigning a theta role to it, other verbs of temporal
or modal meaning combine with the infinitival head and assign theta roles together
with it to a set of shared arguments. Some verbs appear to be totally incapable of
independent theta-role assignment, hence they always combine with an infinitival
head. The verbs listed under (1b), on the other hand, can apparently either assign a
theta role to an infinitival clause, or can combine with an infinitival head and assign
theta roles together with it. Following Kenesei (2000), let us call the former set of
verbs – including fog ‘will’, szokott ‘used to’, and talál ‘happens to’ – auxiliaries.
The verbs listed under (1b), i.e., those which can be used either as subject control
verbs or as auxiliaries, will be called semi-auxiliaries.
A complex predicate can contain at most one auxiliary (which is always finite),
one or more semi-auxiliaries, and a theta-role-assigning lexical verb (which is always infinitival). If the complex predicate consists of three or more verbal elements,
interesting word order possibilities arise, which have inspired a large amount of
literature, including a monograph by Koopman and Szabolcsi (2000) (see also
Bródy 2000, É. Kiss 1999b, Alberti 1999, Bartos 1999b, Olsvay 1999, Szendrői
1999).

9.3.2

The straight verbal complex

If the sentence containing the infinitival complex predicate involves no
focussing or negation, then the surface order of the elements of the verbal complex
corresponds to their underlying order: the highest, finite verb (to be referred to as
V1) stands first, and the lowest, lexical verb (to be referred to as V4) stands last;

206

The syntax of Hungarian

for example:
(20)

A fogoly haza fog akarni próbálni szökni.
the captive home will to.want to.try to.flee
‘The captive will want to try to flee home.’

As is clear from the example in (20), the verb modifier selected by the lexical V4
appears in the specifier of an AspP dominating V1, i.e., the elements of the V1–
V2–V3–V4 verbal complex share one AspP – as expected, given that the verbal
complex describes a single action or state. This AspP, however, can also remain
‘downstairs’, immediately dominating the projection of the lexical verb. Observe
what happens if the verbal complex is dominated by an FP or a NegP:
(21) a.

A fogoly HIÁBA fog akarni próbálni haza szökni.
the captive in.vain will to.want to.try home to.flee
‘In vain will the captive want to try to flee home.’

b. ? A fogoly HIÁBA fog haza akarni próbálni szökni.
c. ?* A fogoly HIÁBA fog akarni haza próbálni szökni.
(22) a.

A fogoly nem fog akarni próbálni haza szökni.
the captive not will to.want to.try home to.flee
‘The captive will not want to try to flee home.’

b. ? A fogoly nem fog haza akarni próbálni szökni.
c. ?* A fogoly nem fog akarni haza próbálni szökni.

The possibility of a VM left-adjoined to the lexical verb to which it belongs is
excluded if the verbal complex does not project an FP or NegP:
(23)

% A fogoly fog akarni próbálni haza szökni.
the captive will to.want to.try home to.flee

Example (23) is ungrammatical as a neutral sentence, with a fogoly in topic position
(but it is acceptable if fog expresses assertion: the denial of a previous denial, in
which case it has presumably been raised to F). To all appearances, an auxiliary
or a semi-auxiliary cannot stand in the initial position of the predicate phrase.
This constraint must be due to the following phonological constraint (recall that
in Hungarian both word stress and phrasal stress fall on the left edge).
(24)

The Auxiliary Constraint
An auxiliary cannot bear phrasal stress.

(Naturally, the constraint also applies to semi-auxiliary verbs when they are used as
auxiliaries.) Let us assume that it is optional whether the AspP extending a lexical
verb in a verbal complex immediately dominates the projection of the lexical verb,

207

Non-ﬁnite and semi-ﬁnite verb phrases

or dominates the whole of the verbal complex; i.e., let us assume that both of the
following options are available:
(25) a.

b.

AspP
Spec

Asp'

VP1
V1

VP1

Asp
V1

VP2
VP3

V2
VP2

V2

V3
VP3

V3

AspP
Spec

VP4
V4

Asp'
Asp

VP4
V4

(For those who also accept the pattern illustrated in (21b) and (22b), the verb modifier/aspectualizer of the lexical verb can also merge with the infinitival complex,
consisting of V2 + V3 + V4, excluding the finite verb.) Pattern (25a) is acceptable
in all contexts. Example (25b), on the other hand, is ruled out by the Auxiliary
Constraint in sentences involving no focus or negation.
The question arises how the violation of the Auxiliary Constraint can be avoided
if the lexical verb in the verbal complex selects no verb modifier. Then V4 does not
project an AspP; however, the verbal complex as a whole does project one, whose
specifier will be occupied by the lexical infinitive itself. The infinitive phrase can
be analyzed as a verb modifier if it consists of a mere head, i.e., if its complements
have been extraposed; for example:
(26)

Mari [AspP énekelnii fog akarni tanulni ti ]
Mary
to.sing will to.want to.learn
‘Mary will want to learn to sing.’

The verbal elements that share a single AspP projection – e.g. the V1–V2–V3–V4
complex in (25a) – must be interpreted to denote a single event. If the AspP projection dominates the lowest infinitive, as in (25b), then the single event interpretation
is not enforced; compare:
(27) a.

A fogoly újra haza fog akarni próbálni szökni.
the captive again home will to.want to.try to.flee
‘The captive will again want to try to flee home.’

b. ?? A fogoly haza fog akarni újra próbálni szökni.
c.

A fogoly HIÁBA fog újra akarni próbálni haza szökni.
the captive in.vain will again to.want to.try home to.flee
‘In vain will again the captive want to try to flee home.’

208

The syntax of Hungarian
d.

A fogoly HIÁBA fog akarni újra próbálni haza szökni.
‘In vain will the captive want again to try to flee home.’

e.

A fogoly HIÁBA fog akarni próbálni újra haza szökni.
‘In vain will the captive want to try again to flee home.’

Whereas in (27a,b) the repetition expressed by újra ‘again’ can apply only to the
complex event of wanting to try to flee home, in (27c–e) it applies either to wanting,
or to trying, or to fleeing home, depending on its position.
The verbal elements of the straight order complex predicate form only a loose
unit syntactically. They need not be adjacent; they can be separated not only by a
VM but by adjuncts, as well:
(28) a.

b.
c.

A fogoly haza fog Karácsonykor akarni próbálni szökni.
the captive home will Christmas-at to.want to.try to.flee
‘The captive will want to try to flee home at Christmas.’
?? A fogoly haza fog akarni Karácsonykor próbálni szökni.
A fogoly haza fog akarni próbálni Karácsonykor szökni.

Complex predicate formation presumably means in syntactic terms that the stacked
VPs are interpreted as a single extended verb projection (à la Grimshaw 1991, van
Riemsdijk 1998). Apparently, an adjunct adjoined to an intermediate VP level does
not block this process.
An intervening lexical verb, on the other hand, does prevent complex predicate
formation:
(29)

* A fogoly haza fog félni próbálni szökni.
the captive home will to.fear to.try to.flee
‘The captive will be afraid to try to flee home.’

Whereas the semi-auxiliary próbálni ‘to try’ can form a verbal complex with szökni
‘to escape’, the lexical félni ‘be afraid’ cannot join them; it can only be the head of
another extended verb projection, together with fog. This higher verbal complex
is not available for the elements of the lower verbal complex, among them the
VM haza ‘home’. Haza must move to the Spec,AspP of the lower verbal complex,
whereas the Spec,AspP position of the higher verbal complex must be filled with
félni ‘be afraid’, there being no other available candidate; that is:
(30)

A fogoly [félni fog [haza próbálni szökni]]
the captive to.fear will home to.try to.flee
‘The captive will be afraid to try to flee home.’

Non-ﬁnite and semi-ﬁnite verb phrases

9.3.3

209

The inverse verbal complex

When the verbal complex is preceded by a focus or a negative particle
triggering V movement, the non-finite elements of the verbal complex can also
appear in an inverse order:
(31)

A fogoly HIÁBA fog haza szökni próbálni akarni.
the captive in.vain will home to.flee to.try to.want
‘In vain will the captive want to try to flee home.’

(V1 VM V4 V3 V2)

In addition to the V1 VM V4 V3 V2 order, illustrated in (31), the V1 V2 VM V4
V3 order is also possible, i.e., the inverse order can be restricted only to the bottom
part of the verbal complex:
(32)

A fogoly HIÁBA fog akarni haza szökni próbálni.

(V1 V2 VM V4 V3)

The elements in the inverse order section of the verbal complex must be strictly
adjacent; the straight and the inverse order section, however, can be separated by
non-verbal elements; for example:
(33) a.

A fogoly nem fog most haza szökni próbálni akarni.
the captive not will now home to.flee to.try to.want
‘The captive will not want to try to flee home now.’

b. * A fogoly nem fog haza szökni most próbálni akarni.
c. * A fogoly nem fog haza szökni próbálni most akarni.

The complement–head order, typical of word internal domains, as well as the
strict adjacency of the infinitival elements, have led Bródy (2000) and É. Kiss
(1999b) to the conclusion that the infinitival elements have undergone cyclic
incorporation – in fact, compounding – resulting in a complex word.1 Bartos
(1999b) derives the inverted order of the verbal elements from the assumption that
(semi-)auxiliaries may optionally assume a [+suffix] feature, which causes them to
be realized in morphology on the right-hand side of their lexical complement. The
[+suffix] feature of próbálni ‘to try’ licenses the order in (32), and the [+suffix]
features of próbálni and akarni ‘to want’ license the order in (31).
The initial structure that (31) and (32) are derived from is a V1 V2 V3 VM +
V4 structure, with VM incorporated into V4 (34a). Then, as a next step, the VM +
V4 unit is incorporated into V3 (34b). Eventually V3 (with V4 incorporated into
it) is incorporated into V2 (34c).
(34) a.
b.
c.
1

A fogoly nem fog akarni próbálni [haza szökni]
A fogoly nem fog akarni [[hazaszökni]i próbálni] ti
A fogoly nem fog [[hazaszökni próbálni]i akarni] ti

Koopman and Szabolcsi (2000) deny this conclusion; they analyze both the straight order
construction and the inverse order construction as (remnant) phrasal movement.

210

The syntax of Hungarian

It is not quite clear why the complex V2 cannot be incorporated into the finite V1,
i.e., why (35) is ungrammatical:
(35)

* A fogoly [[hazaszökni próbálni akarni]i fog] ti

In any case, the ungrammaticality of (35) cannot be an accident, because in German
we find the same distribution of grammaticality over the different orders: whereas
the V1 V2 V4 V3 and the V1 V4 V3 V2 orders are grammatical, the V4 V3 V2
V1 order is impossible; compare:
. . .dass er hätte können herein kommen wollen
that
he had can
in
to.come to.want
‘that he could have wanted to come in’

(V1 V2 VM V4 V3)

b.
. . .dass er hätte herein kommen wollen können
c. * . . .dass er herein kommen wollen können hätte

(V1 VM V4 V3 V2)
(*VM V4 V3 V2 V1)

(36) a.

It must be the Tense on V1 that blocks incorporation into V1. This hypothesis is
supported by the fact that in infinitival constructions involving no finite V, e.g. that
in (37) below, roll-up, i.e., cyclic left-adjunction and incorporation, can proceed
all the way in the verbal complex.
(37)

[[[Haza szökni] próbálni] akarni] hiábavaló dolog.
home to.flee to.try
to.want useless thing
‘Wanting to try to flee home is a useless thing.’

If the verbs except the lowest one are indeed suffixal in this type of roll-up structure,
as claimed by Bartos (1999b), then the verb that represents the root for the Tense
suffix apparently cannot assume a [+suffix] feature (or, alternatively, Tense cannot
merge with a [+suffix] element).

9.4

Agreeing inﬁnitives with a case-marked subject

9.4.1

Their formal properties

In infinitival complements of impersonal predicates, which provide no
controller for a PRO subject, the infinitive can have a case-marked subject represented by a lexical noun phrase, a pronoun, or a pro; for example:
(38) a.

Korábban kellett volna Jánosnak haza men-ni-e.
earlier
needed COND John-DAT home go-INF-3SG
‘John needed to have gone home earlier.’

b.

Korábban kellett volna neked/pro haza menned.
earlier
needed COND you-DAT home go-INF-2SG
‘You needed to have gone home earlier.’

Non-ﬁnite and semi-ﬁnite verb phrases

211

Infinitives with a lexical or pronominal subject bear a subject agreement marker.
Observe the full paradigm of infinitival agreement:
(39)

(Nekem) haza kell men-n-em.
I-DAT home need go-INF-1SG

(Nekünk) haza kell men-n-ünk.
we-DAT home need go-INF-1PL

(Neked) haza kell men-n-ed.
you-DAT home need go-INF-2SG

(Nektek) haza kell men-n-etek.
you-DAT home need go-INF-2PL

(Neki) haza kell men-ni-e.
he-DAT home need go-INF-3SG

(Nekik) haza kell men-ni-ük.
they-DAT home need go-INF-3PL

Apart from the case-marked subject and the agreement marker on the infinitival
head, the syntactic properties of the infinitive phrase are identical with those of
non-agreeing infinitive phrases. Thus, its VP can project an AspP, FP, NegP, DistP,
and/or a TopP. As is expected, the infinitival suffix can merge either with VP or
with AspP, i.e., the focus or the negative particle can be left-adjacent either to the
verb or to the verb modifier; for example:
(40)

Érdemes volt [DistP mindkét feladatra [FP Marit
fel kérnünk
worthwhile was
both
job-for
Mary-ACC VM ask-INF-1PL
/kérnünk
fel]]
/ask-INF-1PL VM
‘It was worthwhile to ask Mary for both jobs.’

Impersonal modal auxiliaries selecting an agreeing infinitive with a case-marked
subject form a verbal complex with it; i.e., the modal and the infinitive share a
single set of arguments and project a single set of operator phrases. The auxiliary
is subject to the Auxiliary Constraint, i.e., unless it forms a phonological word
with a focus or a negative particle, the auxiliary must be preceded by the VM of
the infinitive or, in case it has none, by the infinitive itself:
(41) a.

b.

Jánosnak mindkét lányt
fel kell hı́vnia.
John-DAT both
girl-ACC up must call-INF-3SG
‘John must call up both girls.’
Jánosnak telefonálnia
kell.
John-DAT telephone-INF-3SG must
‘John must make a phone call.’

Because of the lack or scarcity of matrix arguments in this type of construction, the
matrix topic and focus positions are often occupied by arguments of the infinitive
even if the matrix predicate and the infinitive do not share an aspectual projection.
This is not an indication of clause union; topic and focus movement can also cross

212

The syntax of Hungarian

a finite clause boundary; compare:
(42) a.

b.

9.4.2

[TopP Jánosnaki sikerült [AspP elérnie
ti a vonatot]]
John-DAT succeeded catch-INF-3SG the train-ACC
‘John succeeded in catching the train.’
Jánosnak [FP CSAK A KÉSŐI VONATOTi sikerült[AspP elérnie ti ]]
John-DAT only the late train-ACC succeeded catch-INF-3SG
‘As for John, it was only the late train that he managed to catch.’

The distribution of the agreeing infinitive and the dative subject

It is not easy to disentangle the contexts in which an agreeing infinitive
with a case-marked subject is licensed. Two types of complications blur the picture. On the one hand, the dative-marked noun phrase interpretable as the subject
of the infinitive may occasionally represent the experiencer argument of the matrix predicate, controlling or binding a phonologically empty subject inside the
infinitive phrase. On the other hand, the agreement marker of the infinitive may
occasionally be missing in contexts that otherwise allow agreement. It remains to
be clarified whether the missing agreement marker is merely phonologically null
or is also syntactically absent in such cases.
In a monograph devoted to Hungarian inflected infinitives, Tóth (2000a) lists
the following types of contexts in which inflected infinitives with a case-marked
subject occur:

I

Monadic predicates, among them:

(i)

epistemic modals: kell ‘must’

(43)

Ég
a villany, Kovácséknak már
otthon kell lenniük.
shines the light Kovács-PL-DAT already at.home must be-INF-3PL
‘The light is on, the Kovácses must be at home already.’

(ii)

non-directed deontic modals: kell ‘need’, szabad ‘may’

(44)

Rég nem esett, nem szabadna a földnek vizesnek lennie.
long not rained not should the soil-DAT wet-DAT be-INF-3SG
‘It hasn’t rained for long, it shouldn’t be the case that the soil be wet.’

(iii)

nominal predicates: gonoszság ‘viciousness’, szemtelenség
‘impertinence’, illetlenség ‘impoliteness’

(45)

Szemtelenség Jánosnak ilyet
feltételeznie.
impertinence John-DAT such-ACC surmise-INF-3SG
‘It was impertinence for John to surmise such a thing.’

Non-ﬁnite and semi-ﬁnite verb phrases

II

213

Dyadic predicates taking an experiencer in addition to the infinitive
phrase:2
evaluative predicates: fontos ‘important’, kellemes ‘pleasant’,
kellemetlen ‘unpleasant’, lehetetlen ‘impossible’, nehéz ‘hard’,
könnyű ‘easy’

(i)

(46)

Fontos volna
Jánosnak megtudnia
az igazat.
important would.be John-DAT learn-INF-3SG the truth-ACC
‘It would be important for John to learn the truth.’

(ii)

subject-oriented deontic modals: kell ‘need’, lehet ‘may’, illik ‘be
becoming’, sikerül ‘succeed’, muszáj ‘must’, szabad ‘may’

(47)

Jánosnak nem szabad haza mennie.
John-DAT not must home go-INF-3SG
‘John must not go home.’

(iii)

nominal predicates with an ablative: gonoszság ‘viciousness’,
szemtelenség ‘impertinence’, illetlenség ‘impoliteness’, szép dolog
‘a nice thing’, ügyes dolog ‘a skillful thing’

(48) a.

Jánostól nem volt szép dolog cserben hagyni minket.
John-ABL not was nice thing in.lurch leave-INF us
‘It wasn’t a nice thing of John to leave us in the lurch.’

b.

Butaság volt Jánostól olyan korán haza menni.
stupidity was John-ABL so
early home go-INF
‘It was stupidity of John to go home so early.’

III

Permissive verbs taking a dative permissee: hagy ‘let’, enged
‘allow’, segı́t ‘help’

(49) a.

Hagytam Jánosnak levágni a hajamat.
I.let
John-DAT cut-INF my hair
‘I let John cut my hair.’

b.

2

Engedtem levágnia
a hajamat.
I.let
cut-INF-3SG my hair
‘I let him cut my hair.’

Tóth (2000a) analyzes the copula taking a relative clause, e.g. that in (i) below, as a
monadic predicate.
(i)

Nincs Marinak mit
fölvennie.
isn’t Mary-DAT what-ACC wear-INF-3SG
‘There is nothing for Mary to wear.’

In fact, it behaves more like an optionally dyadic predicate, with the dative interpretable as
either the subject of the infinitive, or both the subject of the infinitive and the beneficiary
of the matrix verb.

214

The syntax of Hungarian
c.

Segı́tettem felvinniük a szekrényt a padlásra.3
I.helped take-INF-3PL the cupboard the loft-to
‘I helped them to take the cupboard to the loft.’

The lexical noun phrase or pronoun interpreted as the subject of the agreeing
infinitive bears the dative case. When the matrix predicate is monadic, as those
in (43)–(45), the dative-marked lexical noun phrase is clearly an argument of the
infinitival verb.
(50) a.

Jánosnak már
otthon kell lennie.
John-DAT already home must be-INF-3SG
‘John must already be at home.’

b.

Nem szükséges a padlónak felmosva lennie.
not necessary the floor-DAT scrubbed be-INF-3SG
‘It is not necessary for the floor to be scrubbed.’

c.

Szemtelenség Jánosnak ilyet
kérdeznie.
impertinence John-DAT such-ACC ask-INF-3SG
‘It is impertinence for John to ask such a thing.’

Note that in this case the presence of the agreement marker on the infinitive is
obligatory:
(51) a. * Jánosnak már
otthon kell lenni.
John-DAT already home must be-INF
‘John must already be at home.’
b. *? Nem szükséges a padlónak felmosva lenni.
not necessary the floor-DAT scrubbed be-INF
‘It is not necessary for the floor to be scrubbed.’
c. * Szemtelenség Jánosnak ilyet
kérdezni.
impertinence John-DAT such-ACC ask-INF
‘It is impertinence for John to ask such a thing.’

3

Tóth (2000a) adopts – or rather adapts – Borer’s theory of anaphoric Agr (Borer 1989). She
argues that what licenses an agreeing infinitive with a case-marked subject is the lack of
agreement between the controller of its subject and the matrix verb. The agreement in the
infinitive phrase is anaphoric on the matrix agreement, and control is established through
this anaphoric relation if both the controller is coindexed with the matrix agreement, and
the controllee is coindexed with the embedded agreement. When there is no controller,
or the designated controller is a matrix dative argument not coindexed with agreement,
the infinitive needs a lexical subject of its own, which is assigned dative case by the
embedded Agr. For a rich array of further facts and arguments, see Tóth (2000a). The
present description of inflected infinitives adopts only some of her solutions because it
also intends to account for the obligatoriness or optionality of the presence of agreement
on the infinitive, as well as the occasional anti-agreement, to which Tóth does not attribute
any significance.

Non-ﬁnite and semi-ﬁnite verb phrases

215

When the matrix predicate selecting the agreeing infinitive is a dyadic predicate
allowing a dative experiencer, as those in (46)–(47), the dative-marked noun phrase
seems to be interpretable either as the subject of the infinitive, or as simultaneously
both the subject of the infinitive and the experiencer of the matrix predicate. In
such cases the agreement on the infinitive is optional; for example:
(52) a.

b.

Jánosnak fontos
megjelenni(e) az ünnepélyen.
John-DAT important appear-INF(3SG) the ceremony-at
‘It is important for John to appear at the ceremony.
Jánosnak muszáj otthon tartózkodni(a).
John-DAT must home stay-INF(3SG)
‘It is necessary for John to stay at home.’

When the matrix predicate is a noun phrase taking an ablative complement, the
ablative functions semantically both as a matrix argument and as the subject of the
infinitive. Agreement on the infinitive is impossible:
(53)

Szemtelenség volt tőled
nem köszönni /?* köszönnöd.
impertinence was you-ABL not greet-INF / greet-INF-2SG
‘It was an impertinence of you not to say hello.’

The claim that – at least on the level of semantics – the dative/ablative noun phrase
functions simultaneously both as the experiencer of the matrix predicate and the
subject of the infinitive is supported by the fact that the matrix experiencer and the
infinitival subject cannot both be spelled out:
(54) a. * Jánosnak kellemetlen Péternek ilyet
kérnie.
John-DAT unpleasant Peter-DAT such-ACC ask-INF-3SG
‘It was unpleasant for John for Peter to ask such a thing.’
b. * Jánosnaki kellemetlen nekii /j ilyet
kérnie.
John-DAT unpleasant he-DAT such-ACC ask-INF-3SG
‘It is unpleasant for John for him to ask for such a thing.’

Tóth (2000a) demonstrates that when the permissive verbs hagy, enged, and segı́t
occur with a dative permissee and an infinitive, the dative is a complement of
the matrix verb; it is always inside the matrix clause. When the permissee is the
subject of an embedded idiom, i.e., when it is clearly part of the embedded phrase,
it cannot appear in the dative. (The alternative accusative permissee, on the other
hand, is part of the embedded clause; see (7) above.)
(55)

* Engedtem a szögnek kibújni a zsákból.
I.allowed the nail-DAT to.get.out the sack-from
‘I allowed the cat to get out of the bag.’

In permissive constructions with a lexical dative permissee the infinitive cannot
bear an agreement marker; compare:

216

The syntax of Hungarian

(56) a.

Az inasoknak
nem hagytam levágni(*uk) a hajamat.
the apprentices-DAT not let-I
cut-INF(*3PL) my hair
‘I didn’t let the apprentices cut my hair.’

b.

Segı́tettem a gyerekeknek megı́rni(*uk) a leckét.
I.helped the children-DAT write-INF(*3PL) the lesson
‘I helped the children write the lesson.’

Note that the agreement marker cannot even be spelled out in the presence of a
pronominal permissee:
(57)

Nem hagytam nekik
levágni(*uk) a hajamat.
not let-I
they-DAT cut-INF(*3PL) my hair
‘I didn’t let them cut my hair.’

Summarizing our observations: the presence or absence of the agreement marker on
the infinitive correlates with whether or not the lexical subject belongs to the infinitive. Where it is thematically part of the infinitive phrase, agreement is obligatory.
Where it can belong either to the matrix predicate or to the infinitive, agreement is
optional. Where the dative is clearly an argument of the matrix clause, agreement
is impossible. Let us attempt to account for these facts.
Let us assume that in sentences with a monadic matrix predicate, whose sole argument is the infinitive phrase, the dative (or its trace) is also syntactically part of the
infinitive phrase. Then the sentences in (50a–c) have the following type of structure:
(58) a.

b.

Jánosnaki már
otthon kell [ti lennie]
John-DAT already home must be-INF-3SG
‘John must already be at home.’
Nem szükséges [a padlónak felmosva lennie]
not necessary the floor-DAT scrubbed be-INF-3SG
‘It is not necessary for the floor to be scrubbed.’

Let us assume, furthermore, that in the case of a potentially dyadic matrix predicate
with an optional dative experiencer, the dative may be the experiencer subcategorized by the matrix predicate, controlling a PRO subject in the infinitive phrase
which has no agreement marker. (For a similar proposal, see Dalmi 1995: Section
7.4.) The ablative argument of a nominal predicate also controls a PRO subject in
an uninflected infinitive phrase.
(59) a.

b.

Jánosnaki /nekii muszáj [PROi otthon tartózkodni]
John-DAT/he-DAT must
home stay
‘It is necessary for John to stay at home.’
Jánosnaki kellemetlen [PROi ilyet
kérni]
John-DAT unpleasant
such-ACC ask-INF
‘It is unpleasant for John to ask for such a thing.’

Non-ﬁnite and semi-ﬁnite verb phrases
c.

217

Szemtelenség Jánostóli [PROi ilyet
kérni]4
impertinence John-ABL
such-ACC ask-INF
‘It is impertinence of John to ask for such a thing.’

If these predicates are used monadically, then the dative-marked lexical subject is
generated inside the infinitive, and the infinitive agrees with it:
(60) a.

Jánosnaki /nekii muszáj [ti otthon tartózkodnia]
John-DAT/he-DAT must
home stay-INF-3SG
‘John must stay at home.’

b.

Jánosnaki kellemetlen [ti ilyet
kérnie]
John-DAT unpleasant
such-ACC ask-INF-3SG
‘It is unpleasant for John to ask for such a thing.’

c.

Szemtelenség [a fiúknak ilyet
kérniük]
impertinence the boys-DAT such-ACC ask-INF-3PL
‘It is impertinence for the boys to ask for such a thing.’

Permissive verbs, whose dative argument – whether lexical or pronominal – is
always outside their infinitival complement, take an infinitive with a controlled
PRO subject:
(61) a.

Az inasoknaki
nem hagytam [PROi levágni a hajamat]
the apprentices-DAT not let-I
cut-INF my hair
‘I didn’t let the apprentices cut my hair.’

b.

Segı́tettem a gyerekekneki [PROi megı́rni a leckét]
I.helped the children-DAT
write-INF the lesson
‘I helped the children write the lesson.’

c.

Segı́tettem nekiki [PROi megı́rni a leckét]
I. helped they-DAT
write-INF the lesson

When in the case of a monadic (or monadically used) matrix predicate the agreeing
infinitive has no visible subject, as in (62), its subject is a dative pro internal to the
infinitival phrase. As Tóth (2000a) points out, a dative pronoun can be dropped
because its features are recoverable from agreement.
4

Tóth (2000a) claims that the subject of the infinitive in these cases is a case-marked pro.
She assumes that the predicative adjective always agrees in case with the subject; hence,
the dative case of the adjective in (i) is evidence of a dative-marked pro subject:
(i)

Jánosnak kellemetlen [pro rámenősnek lenni]
John-DAT unpleasant
pushy-DAT be-INF
‘It is unpleasant for John to be pushy.’

However, Tóth’s premise is false; the predicative adjective in an infinitival phrase can
always bear dative case – even when its subject is in the accusative:
(ii)

Engedtem [Jánost
rámenősnek lenni]
I.allowed John-ACC pushy-DAT be-INF
‘I allowed John to be pushy.’

218

The syntax of Hungarian

(62)

Fontos [pro idejében haza érkezned]
important in.time home arrive-INF-2SG
‘It is important for you to arrive at home in time.’

In the case of dyadic predicates allowing a controlled PRO in the infinitive phrase,
a missing controller results in an arbitrary PRO reading:
(63) a.

Kellemetlen [PRO ilyet
kérni]
unpleasant
such-ACC ask
‘It is unpleasant to ask for such a thing.’

b.

Nem hagyom [PRO levágni a hajamat]
not let-I
cut-INF my hair
‘I don’t allow my hair to be cut.’

Obligatorily monadic predicates (i.e., epistemics and non-directed deontic modals),
which do not license a caseless subject in their infinitival complement, do not allow a PROarb , either. Thus, the modal in the following example cannot have a
non-directed deontic reading:
(64)

Június vége van, Magyarországon már
aratni
kell.
June’s end is in.Hungary
already harvest-INF must
‘It is the end of June, they must already harvest in Hungary.’

There remains one pattern to account for: permissive verbs can have an agreeing infinitival complement when the permissee is not spelled out phonologically;
compare:
(65) a.

Hagytam levágniuk a hajamat.
I.let
cut-INF-3PL my hair
‘I let them cut my hair.’

b.

Segı́tek megı́rnod
a leckét.
I.help write-INF-2SG the lesson
‘I help you write the lesson.’

Apparently these constructions involve an infinitival phrase with a pro subject. If
the subject is lexical or pronominal, it is obligatorily interpreted as the permissee
argument of the matrix verb controlling a PRO. It seems idiosyncratic that a construction should allow a pro but should rule out a pronoun or a lexical noun phrase
in its subject position.

9.4.3

The source of the dative case

The next question to answer is, naturally, what the mechanism of checking
or assigning the dative case of the subject of the infinitive is in infinitival phrases
complementing a monadic(ally used) predicate. Tóth (2000a) stipulates that the

Non-ﬁnite and semi-ﬁnite verb phrases

219

dative case of the subject of an infinitive is a structural case assigned/checked in
Spec,AgrP. Whereas [+Tense, +Agr] inflection checks nominative case, [−Tense,
+Agr] inflection checks dative case.
There is in fact a way of eliminating the stipulative element from this proposal.
There is indication that agreement in the infinitive domain is parallel in relevant
respects to that in the nominal domain. The agreement morphemes appearing
on the infinitive are identical with the inflection morphemes appearing on the
possessed noun, which were analyzed in Section 7.3 as consisting of a -(j)a/(j)e
suffix expressing ‘being possessed’, and an agreement marker. The two morphemes
are fused in many cases, but in the plural the intervening -i- plural suffix makes
their morphosyntactic independence evident:
(66)

a pro birtok-a-i-m ‘my estates’
the estate-POSS-PL-1SG

a pro birtok-a-i-nk
the estate-POSS-PL-1PL

a pro birtok-a-i-d
the estate-POSS-PL-2SG

a pro birtok-a-i-tok
the estate-POSS-PL-2PL

a pro birtok-a-i-0
the estate-POSS-PL-3SG

a pro birtok-a-i-k
the estate-POSS-PL-3PL

The paradigm arising from the fusion of the suffix meaning ‘being possessed’ and
the agreement marker in the case of a singular possessed noun is identical with the
agreement paradigm appearing on the infinitival head:
(67)

a birtok-om ‘my estate’
a birtok-od
a birtok-a
a birtok-unk
a birtok-otok
a birtok-uk

rajzol-n-om ‘draw-INF-1SG’
rajzol-n-od
rajzol-ni-a
rajzol-n-unk
rajzol-n-otok
rajzol-ni-uk

(The -i vowel of the infinitival suffix is dropped in front of a suffix consisting of a
vowel + consonant sequence.) If the two paradigms are, indeed, identical, then the
suffix of the infinitive must also represent the fused sequence of an -a/e morpheme
and an agreement marker. The -a morpheme, however, was argued in Section 7.3
to be a theta-role assigner/licenser and a dative case assigner. Although we referred
to the -(j)a/(j)e morpheme in Section 7.3 as the morpheme of possessedness, in
fact, as has been made clear by Szabolcsi (1983b, 1994a) and Alberti (1995),
it expresses ‘being related to x in a way determined by the lexical head’ rather
than ‘being possessed by x’. In a possessive construction the relation between the
so-called possessor and the so-called possessed noun can also be a whole–part
relation (János lába ‘John’s leg’), a genealogical relation (János nagyapja ‘John’s
grandfather’), a local relation (János iskolája ‘John’s school’), etc., depending

220

The syntax of Hungarian

on what type of relations the given noun participates in in a lexical network.5 If
the lexical head with which the -(j)a/(j)e suffix combines is a theta-role assigning
event nominal, the suffix merely licenses the theta role assigned by the lexical head
(e.g. János in János kiabálása ‘John’s shouting’ will receive an agent role, that in
János megverése ‘John’s beating’ will receive a theme role). In any case, a lexical
head supplied with the -a suffix bears a (specific or non-specific) relation to an
individual; hence, it has the given individual as its argument, and acts as its caseassigner/case-checker. Just as a noun merged with the -(j)a/(j)e suffix assigns dative
case to its argument, an infinitive merged with -a/e assigns dative case to its subject.
Whereas the possessor of a noun can also be realized as a caseless determiner in
Spec,DP, the infinitive projects no DP; hence, this possibility is not open.
If the structure of an infinitive phrase with a case-marked subject is parallel in relevant respects to the structure of a possessive construction, then we expect to attest
the same anti-agreement phenomenon we attested in the case of a lexical possessor
in Section 7.3.3. Recall that we claimed that AgrP is only projected in a possessive
construction if the possessor is a pronominal with a [+person] feature. The optional presence of Agr on the head in the case of an extracted lexical possessor was
interpreted to indicate that the noun phrase external lexical possessor can form a
chain not only with a noun phrase internal trace, but, alternatively, also with a noun
phrase internal pro. (Either pro is a resumptive pronominal spelling out the trace
of extraction, or the lexical possessor is a hanging topic or adjunct base-generated
outside the possessive construction, coindexed with pro). Anti-agreement does
occur with a lexical dative subject, as well, although it is slightly substandard:
(68) a. ? A fiúknak nem kell még haza mennie.
the boys-DAT not need yet home go-INF-3SG
‘The boys don’t need to go home yet.’
compare:
b.

A fiúknak nem kell még haza menniük.
the boys-DAT not need yet home go-INF-3PL

The greater acceptability of (68b) might mean that an infinitive supplied with -a/e
can project agreement not only in the presence of a pronominal subject with a
[+person] feature, but in the case of a lexical subject, as well – e.g. because the
-a/e suffix and the agreement marker, never separated by a plural suffix, are fused
in a joint Inflection Phrase. It can also be the case that the lexical subject associated
with an agreeing infinitive is always a hanging topic coindexed with a pro subject
inside the infinitive phrase. This latter view is supported by the fact that a dative
lexical subject + infinitive sequence fails the constituency tests: it cannot be a
5

On the notion of lexical network, see L. Kálmán (1990).

Non-ﬁnite and semi-ﬁnite verb phrases

221

focus in Spec,FP, and it cannot be a distributive phrase surrounded by még . . . is
‘even’; compare:
(69) a. * [CSAK AZ EBÉDNEK KÉSZ LENNIE] kellene.
only the lunch-DAT ready be-INF-3SG need-COND
‘Only the lunch should be ready.’
b. * [Még Jánosnak úsznia is]
sikerült.6
even John-DAT swim-INF-3SG succeeded
‘It was possible even for John to swim.’

9.5

Adverbial participle phrases

An (extended) VP can be merged with a -va/ve or -ván/vén adverbial
suffix, assuming an AdvP status. As such, it can either function as a VP-adjunct
expressing the manner and/or time of the action denoted by the finite verb, or it
can function as a predicate, expressing the state of the subject or object of the finite
verb. Adverbial participle phrases of adjunct and predicate role also differ in their
derivation; they are therefore discussed separately.7

9.5.1

Adjunct adverbial participle phrases

Adjunct adverbial participle phrases can be derived by the suffix -ván/vén,
and by the suffix -va/ve. The participles -ván/vén are used to describe an event
anterior to the main event of the clause. The following sentence can only mean
that John’s smoking was anterior to his sitting on the bench:
(70)

Cigarettázván, János ült a padon.
smoking
John sat on-the-bench
‘Having smoked, John was sitting on the bench.’

Although it has no complementizer, the-ván/vén participle phrase has clausal properties. It occupies peripheral position with respect to the matrix clause, and, crucially, it can have a nominative lexical subject; compare:
6

Notice that sikerül ‘succeed’ is not a semi-auxiliary verb in standard Hungarian; hence,
(69b) does not violate the Auxiliary Constraint, requiring that the matrix verb and the
infinitive form a complex predicate.
7
For comprehensive analyses of Hungarian adverbial participle phrases, see Komlósy
(1992, 1994), Laczkó (1995a), and Tóth (2000b). Various aspects of them are also discussed in Alberti (1997a, 1998).The present classification of adverbial participle phrases
essentially follows that of Laczkó (1995a) without adopting his terminology. What I call
adjunct adverbial participle phrases are called adverbial participle phrases of manner by
him, and what I call predicative adverbial participle phrases are called adverbial predicate
phrases of state by him.

222

The syntax of Hungarian

(71)

A kapu becsukódván, Aladdin egy barlangban találta magát.
the gate closing,
Aladdin a cave-in
found himself
‘The gate having closed, Aladdin found himself in a cave.’

Since -va/ve participles can have no case-marked subject, the licenser of nominative
case in -ván/vén phrases must be the -n morpheme, presumably the realization of
Tense.8
Interestingly, the subject of the -ván/vén participle cannot be a personal pronoun,
which seems to indicate that the participle phrase cannot project an AgrP; compare:
(72)

* Én nem lévén otthon/ *ti
nem lévén otthon, a postás nem tudott
I not being at.home/you-PL not being at.home the postman not could
bejutni.
get.in
‘I/you not being at home, the postman could not get in.’

When the subject of the -ván/vén phrase is phonologically empty, it is understood
to be coreferent with the matrix subject; compare:
(73) a.

proi /*j Belépvén a patikába, Marii észre vette Jánostj .
entering the drugstore Mary in.sight took John-ACC
‘Having entered the drugstore, Mary noticed John.’

b.

proi /*j Belépvén a patikába, JÁNOSTj vettem észre proi .
entering the drugstore JOHN-ACC took-I in.sight
‘Having entered the drugstore, it was John that I noticed.’

c. ?? proi Rálépve/vén a sı́nekre, Jánosti elütötte a vonat.
stepping
the rails-on John-ACC hit
the train
‘Stepping/having stepped on the rails, the train hit John.’

Given that the -ván/vén phrase does not project an AgrP, its pro subject can only
be licensed by being coindexed with the matrix subject, sharing its person and
number. Or perhaps the subject of the -ván/vén phrase is a case-marked PRO,
assigned nominative by the -n Tense morpheme.
The -va/ve participle phrase does not express an independent event; it functions
as an adverbial of manner (or time). It has no Tense of its own, and cannot have
a case-marked subject. Its PRO subject is obligatorily controlled by the matrix
subject:
(74) a.

8

Jánosi mosolyogvai/∗ j megszólı́totta Maritj .
John smiling
approached Mary-ACC
‘Smiling, John approached Mary.’

Tóth (2000b) analyzes the -n element of the -ván/vén complex as a complementizer,
capable of nominative assignment.

Non-ﬁnite and semi-ﬁnite verb phrases
b.

223

Maritj
mosolyogvai/∗ j megszólı́totta Jánosi .
Mary-ACC smiling
approached John
‘Mary, John approached smiling.’

The extended verb phrase in the -va/ve and -ván/vén phrases has a regular structure: it is a VP possibly extended into an AspP, FP, NegP, DistP, and TopP; for
example:
(75) a.

b.

János [TopP kalapját [AspP le véve fejéről]]
belépett a patikába.
John
his.hat-ACC off taking his.head-from entered the drugstore
‘Taking his hat off his head, John entered the drugstore.’
János [DistP mindkét kesztyűjét [AspP le húzva]] belépett a patikába.
John
both
his.glove-ACC off pulling entered the drugstore
‘Pulling off both of his gloves, John entered the drugstore.’

Similar to infinitival constructions, the participial suffix can merge either with VP
or with AspP, i.e., the focus and negative particle can precede either the verb or
the verb modifier; for example:
(76) a.

b.

János [NegP nem véve le kalapját] be lépett a patikába.
John
not taking off his.hat in stepped the drugstore-to
‘Not taking off his hat, John entered the drugstore.’
János [NegP nem le véve kalapját] be lépett a patikába.

Participle phrases in -va/ve occupy the canonical positions of adverbials of manner
in the matrix sentence: they are either left-adjoined to AspP – as in (76a,b) – or
they are focussed – as in (77). Since the focus must be head-final, in the latter case
not only the verb modifier must precede the participial V, but also its post-head
arguments must be preposed, undergoing a kind of phrase-internal topicalization:
(77)

János [FP [KALAPJÁT [NEM LE VÉVE]] [VP lépett be a patikába]]
John
his.hat-ACC not off taking
entered VM the drugstore
‘Not taking off his hat did John enter the drugstore.’

9.5.2

Predicative adverbial participle phrases

Predicative adverbial participle phrases are also derived by the -va/ve
suffix. Whereas any VP + -va/ve combination (with -va/ve cliticized to the V) can
function as an adjunct, only a subset of the VP + -va/ve combinations can function
as predicates: those whose subject is a theme undergoing a change of state. The
verbs involved include unaccusatives, such as:
(78) a.

A csirke meg van sül-ve.
the chicken VM is fry(INTR)-ed
‘The chicken is fried.’

224

The syntax of Hungarian
b.

A csirkét
csak ropogósra sülve
szeretem.
the chicken-ACC only crispy
fry(INTR)-ed like-I
‘I like chicken only fried crispy.’

Transitive verbs figure in predicative adverbial participle phrases detransitivized,
with their subject argument suppressed, and with their object promoted to subject
role. This change in argument structure is not accompanied by a change in verb
morphology; it is therefore a matter of debate whether it can be regarded as passivization and, if it can, what mechanism of passivization is at work (see Komlósy
1994, Laczkó 1995a, Alberti 1998, Tóth 2000b); compare:
(79) a.

b.

A csirke ki van sütve.
the chicken VM is fry(TR)-ed
‘The chicken is fried.’
A csirkét
csak (?a feleségem által) ropogósra süt-ve
szeretem.
the chicken-ACC only ( my wife
by) crispy
fry(TR)-ed like-I
‘I like chicken only fried crispy by my wife.’

Komlósy (1994) suggests that we attribute to transitive verbs both an ‘active stem’
and a ‘passive stem’ in the lexicon. The passive and active stems are homophonous,
but they are associated with different theta grids. The passive stem is selected by
a handful of suffixes: the predicative -va/ve, as well as -ható/hető ‘-ible/able’ (e.g.
ehető ‘edible’), -atlan/etlen/tatlan/tetlen ‘un-/in- . . . -ed’ (e.g. ı́ratlan ‘unwritten’,
fűtetlen ‘unheated’), and the -t/tt suffix of past participles to be discussed below.
That is, according to Komlósy, the passivization of the non-finite verb of (79a,b)
takes place in the lexicon. According to Laczkó (1995a), the suppression of the
external argument in predicative adverbial participle phrases takes place in syntax,
and is triggered by the predicative -va/ve suffix. Tóth (2000b) eliminates the external argument by adjoining the participial suffix to a VP-shell below the external
argument. The latter two views, naturally, presuppose a hierarchical VP.
The subject of the predicative participle phrase is represented by a PRO (except
for the case when the participle and the matrix verb form a complex predicate, to
be discussed below). Depending on the matrix verb, the controller of PRO is the
matrix subject (80), or the matrix object (81), or either the subject or the object
(82) – but never an oblique argument.
(80) a.

Jánosi [PROi/∗j meghajolva] megszólı́totta Maritj .
John
bowing
approached Mary-ACC
‘Bowing, John approached Mary.’

b.

Maritj [PROi/∗j meghajolva] megszólı́totta Jánosi .
‘Mary,John approached bowing.’

(81) a.

Jánosi [PROj az autóban ülve] hagyta Maritj .
John
in.the.car sitting left
Mary-ACC
‘John left Mary sitting in the car.’

Non-ﬁnite and semi-ﬁnite verb phrases
b.

225

Jánosi [PROj az autóban ülve] találta Maritj .
John
the car-in sitting found Mary-ACC
‘John found Mary sitting in the car.’
Az orvosi [PROi/j levetkőzve] vizsgálja a betegeketj .9
the doctor
undressed examines the patients
‘The doctor examines the patients undressed.’

(82)

As for the inner structure of the predicative adverbial participle phrase, it is a VP
extended into an AspP and possibly into further operator projections. In (83) it is
of the category FP, and in (84) it is of the category NegP. For some reason, this
type of participle phrase is only felicitous if it is head-final. This also means that
the VM must always precede the verb, whether or not the participle phrase also
contains a focus or a negative particle; compare:
(83) a.

A tojást [FP CSAK AZ EGYIK OLDALÁN [AspP meg sütve]] tálalták
fel.
the egg-ACC only the one side-on
VM fried served-they VM
‘They served the egg fried on only one side.’

b. * A tojást [FP CSAK AZ EGYIK OLDALÁN [VP sütve meg]] tálalták fel.
(84) a.

Az adóbevallást [NegP nem [AspP alá ı́rva]] nem fogadják el.
the tax-return-ACC not
under signed not accept-they VM
‘They do not accept the tax return not signed.’

b. * Az adóbevallást [NegP nem [VP ı́rva alá]] nem fogadják el.

When the predicative adverbial participle phrase accompanies a finite copula, the
copula and the participial head form a complex predicate, sharing all operator
projections, including AspP; compare:
(85)

[TopP A kérdőı́v [AspP ki vani [VP ti töltve]]]
the form
in is
filled
‘The form is filled in.’

As an auxiliary, the copula is subject to the Auxiliary Constraint: it cannot stand at
the head of the predicate phrase because it cannot bear phrasal stress. Therefore,
unless it forms a phonological word with a preceding focus or negative particle,
it must be preceded by a constituent in Spec,AspP. The VM of its participial
complement must be raised there – as in (86b,c); or, if it has no VM, the participle
itself must be raised; compare:
(86) a. * [TopP A kerı́tés [VP van [be festve]]]
the fence
is VM painted
‘The fence is painted.’
9

The verb levetkőzik ‘undress self’ does have an affected theme, as required; it is represented by the reflexive suffix on the verb.

226

The syntax of Hungarian
b.

[TopP A kerı́tés [AspP bei van [ti festve]]]

c.

[TopP A kerı́tés [AspP frisseni van [ti festve]]]
the fence
freshly is painted
‘The fence is freshly painted.’

d.

[TopP A kerı́tés [AspP festvei van ti ]]
the fence
painted is
‘The fence is painted.’

Naturally, if the copula is in an unstressed position following a focus or a negative
particle, then the VM will surface in front of the participle it belongs to:
(87) a.

b.

[FP A KERÍTÉS van [be festve]]
the fence is VM painted
‘It is the fence that is painted.’
A kerı́tés [NegP nincs [be festve]]
the fence
isn’t VM painted
‘The fence isn’t painted.’

The copula + adverbial participle phrase complex functions as a kind of passive
construction – see Alberti (1998) (regular passive verb morphology is extinct in
present-day Hungarian). The imperfective and the perfective variants of the copula
result in aspectually different interpretations, corresponding to the English passive
constructions derived by the auxiliary be and get, respectively:
(88) a.

A kapu be van festve.
the gate VM is painted
‘The gate is/has been painted.’

b.

A kapu be lett
festve.10
the gate VM became painted
‘The gate has got painted.’

Example (88a) expresses a state resulting from a completed action; (88b), on the
other hand, expresses a completed action resulting in a state.
The distribution of this construction is markedly different from that of the
English passive. On the one hand, it is narrower; it can only be used if its subject
is an affected theme undergoing a change of state; compare:
(89) a. * Mari meg van látva.
MaryVM is seen
‘Mary has been seen.’
10

The perfective copula lesz also has an imperfective meaning: it can be interpreted as the
future tense equivalent of the imperfective van.

Non-ﬁnite and semi-ﬁnite verb phrases
b.

227

Mari meg van hatva.
MaryVM is moved (emotionally)
‘Mary has been moved.’

At the same time, the distribution of this passive-like construction is also wider
than that of the English-type passive: intransitive verbs with an affected theme
can also be ‘passivized’ in this way. (They allow only the imperfective copula.)
For example:
(90) a.

b.

A virág el van hervadva.
the flower VM is wilted
‘The flower is wilted.’
A ruha ki volt fakulva.
the dress VM was faded
‘The dress was faded.’

Alberti (1997a, 1998) claims that passivization can be interpreted as agent suppression, or patient preferring, or both. Hungarian opts for interpreting passivization
as patient preferring, which also licenses passivization in the case of unaccusative
verbs with an affected subject. Choosing this type of ‘passive’ instead of the active verb form – i.e., choosing (91a) instead of (91b) – has primarily aspectual
consequences; compare:
(91) a.

b.

A ruha ki volt fakulva.
the dress VM was faded
‘The dress was faded.’
A ruha ki fakult/ Ki fakult a ruha.
the dress VM faded/ VM faded the dress
‘The dress faded.’

In (91b) we predicate a (past) event, and we have the option of predicating it of the
subject, or of an invisible pronominal element referring to the given spatiotemporal
location. In (91a), on the other hand, we predicate a (past) state of the subject
(resulting from a completed event). ‘Preferring the patient’ in the case of (91a)
means that the affectedness of the patient is focussed on.

9.6

Adjectival participle phrases

If a VP is merged with an -ó/ő or -t/tt suffix (to be cliticized to the V), it
assumes an AdjP-like status, and can be used attributively in the sentence. Its PRO
subject is coreferent with the noun phrase modified by the participle phrase.

228

The syntax of Hungarian

The -ó/ő suffix can be added to any type of verb, whether it is agentive, unaccusative, or transitive; compare:
(92) a.

az éneklő primadonna
the singing prima donna

b.

az elhangzó dal
the sounding song

c.

a dalt
eléneklő primadonna
the song-ACC singing prima donna
‘the prima donna singing the song’

The -t/tt suffix, on the other hand, is merged in standard Hungarian only with verbs
whose surface subject is a theme. It combines, on the one hand, with unaccusatives
(93a) and, on the other hand, with the passive stem of transitive verbs (93b), but it
cannot combine with agentive verbs (93c). (Therefore, the possibility of merging
with the -t/tt participial suffix is a test of unaccusativity.)
(93) a.
b.

az elhangzott dal
the sounded song
az elzongorázott darab
the performed
piece

c. * a zongorázott fiú
the performed boy

Since the -ó/ő suffix can be combined with all stems, unaccusative verbs, which
also allow the -t/tt suffix, can be extended into both types of adjectival participle
phrases. In their case, as Laczkó (1995a) points out, the two suffixes have come to
be associated with different interpretations; compare:
(94) a.

b.

az elhangzó dal
the sounding song
‘the song sounding [being performed]’
az elhangzott dal
the sounded song
‘the song having sounded [having been performed]’

In the case of unaccusatives, the -ó/ő participle expresses simultaneity, and the -t/tt
participle expresses anteriority.
The adjectival participle suffix is merged with an AspP, which can also be further
extended by logical operators and topics (95). As has been well known at least
since Emonds (1978), an attributive phrase must be head-final. This means that
not only must the VM always precede the participial head, but the arguments and
adjuncts must also undergo phrase-internal topicalization.

Non-ﬁnite and semi-ﬁnite verb phrases
(95)

[TopP a határidőig [NegP nem [AspP be nyújtott]]] pályázatok
the deadline-by
not
VM submitted applications
‘the applications not submitted by the deadline’11

9.7

Summary

229

This chapter has argued that infinitival and participial phrases have the
inner structure of an extended VP: they project an AspP, and possibly an FP, NegP,
DistP, and TopP, as well. The movement possibilities of their constituents are
determined by the same constraints that are also operative in finite verb projections.
Non-finite and finite verb projections differ in one respect: the non-finite verb
projection merging with the focus or the negative particle need not be a VP; it can
also be an AspP, containing a preverbal verb modifier.
Since the subject of an uninflected non-finite verb phrase has no case assigner/checker, it is represented by a PRO. Inflected infinitives, as well as -ván/vén
adverbial participles merged with a Tense head, on the other hand, take a casemarked lexical subject. The subject of the inflected infinitive is assigned dative case
by the -a/e suffix of the infinitive (also present on the possessor in possessive constructions), whereas the subject of the -ván/vén participle is assigned nominative by
the -n Tense suffix. The inflected infinitive also participates in person agreement.
The infinitival or participial suffix with which the VP/AspP is merged determines the function that the non-finite VP projection can have in a matrix clause.
The infinitive phrase functions as a complement of the matrix verb, the adverbial
participle phrase functions as an adjunct (an adverbial of manner or time, or a
predicate), whereas the adjectival participle phrase functions as an attribute.
Infinitives (whether inflected or uninflected) and predicative adverbial participles can also form a complex predicate with an auxiliary or semi-auxiliary finite
verb, in which case they share a single functional domain.

11

In negated non-finite verb phrases the verb modifier can, in fact, also precede the negative
particle. In this case the participial suffix is merged with a VP instead of an AspP, and
the verb modifier undergoes left-adjunction to NegP – similar to the other complements
and adjuncts of the head in the obligatorily head-final participial phrase:
(i)

a határidőig be nem nyújtott pályázatok
the deadline-by in not submitted applications
‘the applications not submitted by the deadline’

10

The subordinate clause
10.1

Introduction

The internal structure of subordinate clauses is essentially identical with
the structure of matrix clauses. They differ from matrix clauses only to the extent
that, on the one hand, they contain a complementizer, and, on the other hand, they
are often associated with a pronoun, which serves to pick up the case assigned
to the clause by the matrix predicate, and/or to represent the clause in a matrix
operator position that is not available for clausal constituents; for example:
(1) a.

b.

János azt
is meg ı́gérte, [hogy segı́teni fog]
John that-ACC also VM promised that to.help will
‘John also promised that he would help.’
János CSAK ARRÓL beszélt, [AMIT TAPASZTALT]
John only about.it spoke what he.experienced
‘John spoke only about what he experienced.’

In (1a) azt (is), an accusative pronoun in Spec,DistP, expresses that the hogy-clause,
or that-clause, has the grammatical function of an object, and the logical function of
a distributive phrase. In (1b) (csak) arról, an oblique pronoun in Spec,FP, expresses
that the relative clause functions as the oblique argument of the matrix predicate,
and it represents the value of the matrix focus operator.1

10.2

That-clauses

10.2.1 The structure of clausal arguments
In Hungarian, the unmarked subordinating operator is hogy ‘that’, occupying the head position of a CP projection. The CP is associated with a pronoun,
1

For a detailed analysis of subordination in Hungarian, see Kenesei’s monograph published
both in Hungarian and in English (Kenesei 1992, 1994).

230

The subordinate clause

231

which picks up the case assigned to the argument by the matrix predicate; for
example:
(2) a.

Az, [hogy Éva szereti Gergőt], nyilvánvaló.
it that Eve loves Gergő obvious
‘That Eve loves Gergő is obvious.’

b.

Azt
hiszem, [hogy Éva szereti Gergőt]
that-ACC think-I that Eve loves Gergő
‘I think that Eve loves Gergő.’

c.

Hallottál róla, [hogy Éva szereti Gergőt]?
heard-you about.it that Eve loves Gergő
‘Have you heard about it that Eve loves Gergő?’

The pronoun also serves to represent the subordinate clause in the matrix operator
positions that cannot take a clausal constituent. Thus, in (2b) the pronoun is in
Spec,AspP, expressing the aspectualizer function of the subordinate clause. Observe also (3a–d), in which the clausal object functions as the focus of the matrix
clause. Both (3a), in which Spec,FP is taken by the pronoun + clause complex, and
(3b), in which Spec,FP is taken by the subordinate clause alone, are ungrammatical. Spec,FP must be occupied by the pronoun, and the clause must be extraposed –
either to the right, or to the left of the predicate phrase. (I use the term ‘extraposition’ merely as a metaphor, expressing the non-adjacency of the pronoun and the
clause.) The constraint prohibiting a clause in Spec,FP may be syntactic: focus
constituents must be head-final for some reason. According to Kenesei (1992),
and Vogel and Kenesei (1987), on the other hand, the restriction against clausal
foci is phonological: the focus constituent must constitute a single phonological
phrase with the verb following it.
(3) a.

b.
c.
d.

* János [Spec,FP CSAK [AZT,
[HOGY NYÍLIK AZ AJTÓ]]] vette észre.
John
only that-ACC that opens the door noticed VM
‘John only noticed that the door was opening.’
* János [Spec,FP CSAK [HOGY NYÍLIK AZ AJTÓ]] vette észre.
János [Spec,FP CSAK AZT] vette észre, [HOGY NYÍLIK AZ AJTÓ]
? János, [HOGY NYÍLIK AZ AJTÓ], [Spec,FP CSAK AZT] vette észre.

The pronoun coindexed with the that-clause is the regular pronoun referring to an
inanimate singular 3rd person referent or antecedent. This pronoun has the form of
a 3rd person singular personal pronoun in VP-internal position, and the form of a
demonstrative in the preverbal operator position. Pronouns are subject to pro-drop
up to recoverability in the VP, which means that VP-internal subject pronouns are
always missing; object pronouns are dropped in the singular; and oblique pronouns
are dropped, but their case endings are spelled out, supplied with an agreement

232

The syntax of Hungarian

morpheme (see Section 8.5) Pro-drop is also possible in topic position: a pronoun
in Spec,TopP is only spelled out if it is set into a contrast.
Observe the pronominal head of a subject clause (4) and an oblique argument
clause (5), representing the clause in topic position (a), distributive quantifier
position (b), focus position (c), and VP-internal argument position (d).
(4) a.

[TopP Az/pro nyilvánvaló volt, [hogy Éva szereti Gergőt]]
it
obvious
was that Eve loves Gergő
‘It was obvious that Eve loved Gergő.’

b.

[DistP Az is nyilvánvaló volt, [hogy Éva szereti Gergőt]]
‘It, too, was obvious that Eve loved Gergő.’

c.

[FP CSAK AZ volt nyilvánvaló, [HOGY ÉVA SZERETI GERGŐT]]
‘Only that was obvious that Eve loved Gergő.’

d.

[AspP Nyilvánvaló volt pro, [hogy Éva szereti Gergőt]]
‘It was obvious that Eve loved Gergő.’

(5) a.

[TopP Abban bı́ztak,
[hogy hamarosan megérkezik a segı́tség]]
in.that trusted-they that soon
arrives
the help
‘They counted on it that help would soon arrive.’

b.

[DistP Abban is bı́ztak, [hogy hamarosan megérkezik a segı́tség]]
‘They counted on that, too, that help would soon arrive.’

c.

[FP CSAK ABBAN bı́ztak, [HOGY HAMAROSAN MEGÉRKEZIK A SEGÍTSÉG]]
‘Only that did they count on that help would soon arrive.’

d.

[VP Bı́ztak bennei , [hogy hamarosan megérkezik a segı́tség]]2
‘They counted on it that help would soon arrive.’

Perhaps the most common type of subordinate clauses is represented by the
clausal object of verbs of saying, and verbs expressing mental activities; for
example:
(6) a.

b.

Azt
gondoltam/hittem, [hogy János késni fog]
that-ACC thought-I /believed-I that John be.late will
‘I thought/believed that John would be late.’
János azt
akarta/szerette volna,
[hogy induljunk
el idejében]
John that-ACC wanted/have.liked.would that leave-SUBJ-1PL VM in.time
‘John wanted/would have liked that we leave in time.’

It is not immediately obvious whether the pronoun coindexed with the object
clause occupies Spec,AspP or Spec,FP. Whether or not the pronoun + clause
complex functions as a focus can be tested by the focus test proposed in
2

Benne ‘in-POSS.3SG’ is an instance of a PP with the pro complement of P dropped. The
version without pro-drop would be ő-benn-e ‘he-about.POSS-3SG’; see Section 8.5.

The subordinate clause

233

Section 4.1, namely:
(7) a.

b.

János azt
mondta, [[hogy késni fog], és [hogy ne várjuk]]
John that-ACC said
that be.late will-he and that not wait-SUBJ-1PL
‘John said that he would be late and that we shouldn’t wait for him.’
János azt
mondta, [hogy késni fog]
John that-ACC said
that be.late will-he
‘John said that he would be late.’

Example (7b) is a logical consequence of (7a), i.e., (7a) and (7b) can be simultaneously true, which means that the pronoun + clause complexes do not express
exhaustive identification; hence, they are not foci. Consequently, the pronoun coindexed with the extraposed clause must be sitting in Spec,AspP. In examples like
(7b), the pronoun indeed clearly functions as an aspectualizer: by supplying the
process verb with an object, it turns it into terminative–resultative, in other words,
it turns it into an accomplishment verb.
If these predicates are modified by úgy ‘so’, they take a clausal complement
without a visible pronoun associate. Úgy, which serves semantically to express a
reservation concerning the truth of the subordinate proposition, appears to be an
alternative of the demonstrative pronoun associated with the subordinate clause.
Compare:
(8) a.

b.

Azt
gondolom/hiszem, [hogy igazad van]
that-ACC think-I /believe-I that right are-you
‘I think you are right.’
Úgy gondolom/hiszem, [hogy igazad van]
so think-I /believe-I that right are-you
‘I think you are right.’

With certain predicates, úgy seems to be the only alternative:
(9) a.

b.

Úgy/*az tűnik, [hogy már
találkoztunk valahol]
so / it seems that already met-we
somewhere
‘It seems that we have already met somewhere.’
Úgy /?? azt
döntöttem /határoztam, [hogy elfogadom az ajánlatot]
so / that-ACC concluded-I/decided-I
that accept-I the offer
‘I concluded/decided that I would accept the offer.’

In fact, the subordinate clause must also have an invisible pro coindexed with it in
these sentences. This is indicated by the objective conjugation of the matrix verb,
which is only used in the presence of a definite object. Apparently, the adverb úgy
functions as the verb modifier instead of azt in these sentences; that is why it must

234

The syntax of Hungarian

land preverbally, in Spec,AspP. The pronoun associated with the clause must stay
postverbally, where it undergoes pro-drop. It is unclear though why it cannot be,
for instance, topicalized; compare:
(10)

* Azt
úgy tudom, [hogy János orvosi egyetemre jelentkezett]
it-ACC so know-I that John medical school-to applied
‘I know it so that John applied to medical school.’

The noun phrase associated with the clausal complement can also be lexical,
denoting a proposition – e.g. a hı́r ‘the news’, az állı́tás ‘the claim’. A lexical
noun phrase associated with a that-clause is also accompanied by a demonstrative
pronoun. Its function is to facilitate interpretation, by indicating that the noun
phrase still has a clausal constituent to come (usually at the end of the matrix
sentence); for example:
(11) a.

[TopP Azt a hı́rt
PÉTERTŐL hallottam, [hogy J ánost kinevezik
that the news-ACC Peter-from heard-I
that John-ACCappoint-they
tanszékvezetővé]]
head.of.department
‘I heard the news that John would be appointed head of the department from
Peter.’

b.

[DistP Azt a hı́rt is Pétertől hallottam, [hogy Jánost kinevezik
tanszékvezetővé]]
‘I heard also the news that John would be appointed head of the department from
Peter.’

c.

[FP AZT A HÍRT hallottam Pétertől, [HOGY JÁNOST KINEVEZIK
TANSZÉKVEZETŐVÉ]]
‘It was the news that John would be appointed head of the department that I
heard from Peter.’

d.

[FP Tegnap [VP hallottam (azt) a hı́rt Pétertől, [hogy Jánost
kinevezik
yesterday heard-I that the news Peter-from that John-ACC appoint-they
tanszékvezetővé]]]
head.of.department
‘Yesterday, I heard from Peter the news that John would be appointed head of the
department.’

The relation between the pronoun and the embedded clause coindexed with it
has been a matter of discussion in the literature. According to Kenesei (1992,
1994), the pronoun and the clause form an expletive–associate chain, and they
are related by coindexing. In a recent variant of the expletive–associate analysis,
proposed by Lipták (1998), the pronoun is generated in the specifier of the embedded CP projection. Argument clauses are claimed by her to have a C head
which has all the categorial, case, and phi-features that a corresponding nominal

The subordinate clause

235

argument would have, and the demonstrative is argued to share/check these features via spec–head agreement. This is the structure she would assign to the clausal
object of (1a):
(12)

CP
DPi

C'
Ci

IP

hogy

segíteni

fog

that-ACC that

to.help

will

azt

According to É. Kiss (1987a, 1990, 1991c), on the other hand, the pronoun and
the clause associated with it constitute a complex noun phrase, with the clause
subject to extraposition. In this framework pronouns associated with bare thatclauses, pronouns associated with that-clauses having a lexical head, as well as
pronouns associated with headless relatives are analyzed in parallel ways. Compare
the structure attributed to a that-clause associated with a bare pronoun, and that
attributed to a that-clause associated with a lexical noun phrase:
(13) a.

b.

DP
DP
DP
DP

CP
Spec

D

CP

C

TopP

az hogy János elnök
lett
that that John chairman became
‘that John has become chairman’

C

D'
D

TopP

NP

az a
hír hogy János elnök
lett
that the news that
John chairman became
‘that news that John has become chairman’

Further merits and disadvantages of the structures in question will become evident
in the analysis of complex sentences involving long operator movement, which is
presented in Section 10.5.
Clausal complements of structure (13a,b) can complement not only a verb, or a
predicative adjective – as in (4a–d) – but also a noun, or an adverb. Here is a clause
complementing an adverb. The resulting adverbial phrase functions as a sentence
adverbial modifying the matrix clause.

236

The syntax of Hungarian

(14)

[AdvP Azon
túl [CP hogy anyagi kárt
okoztak]], a
that-SUPERESS beyond that financial loss-ACC caused-they our
hı́rnevünket
is tönkretették
reputation-ACC also damaged-they
‘In addition to the fact that they caused a financial loss, they also damaged our
reputation.’

In our analysis (resembling that of Stowell 1981), a clause accompanying a noun
phrase denoting a proposition such as a hı́r ‘the news’ is not a complement of the
given noun; it bears an appositive relation to the noun phrase. Nouns that allow
a real clausal complement are derived from verbs and adjectives taking a clausal
complement. Nouns derived from such verbs can only take a complement if they
are supplied with a possessedness suffix, capable of assigning dative case to the
pronoun associated with the clause (see Section 7.3.2); for example:
(15) a.

b.

[DP Annak valószı́nűség-e, [CP hogy János elkésik]], nagyon kicsi.
that-DAT probability-POSS that John is.late
very small
‘The probability of it that John would be late is very small.’
Én nem hiszek [DP annaki lehetőségében,
[hogy Jánost
felveszik
I not believe that-DAT possibility-POSS-in that John-ACC admit-they
az orvosi egyetemre]]
the medical school-to
‘I don’t believe in the possibility of it that John would be admitted to medical
school.’

10.2.2 The position of the subordinate clause in the matrix sentence
In the examples quoted above the complement clause is rarely adjacent
to the pronoun or lexical noun phrase coindexed with it; it is usually extraposed.
(At least in a metaphorical sense. In the framework proposed by Lipták (1998), the
separation of the complement clause from the pronoun is primarily a consequence
of pronoun extraction.) It is time to examine what constraints are involved in
determining its surface position.
An embedded clause cannot occupy an internal position in a lexical projection;
for example, the clausal complement of a noun cannot be internal to the noun phrase,
or the clausal complement of an adverb cannot be internal to the adverbial phrase:
(16) a. * Kicsinek tűnt [DP [DP annak, [CP hogy Jánost
felveszik az orvosi
little
seemed
that-DAT that John-ACC admit-they the medical
egyetemre]], a valószı́nűsége] számunkra.
school-to the probability-POSS us-to
‘The probability of John being admitted to medical school seemed little to us.’
b. * [AdvP [DP Azon,
[hogy anyagi kárt
okoztak]], túl]
a
that-SUPERESS that financial loss-ACC caused-they beyond our
hı́rnevünket
is tönkretették.
reputation-ACC also damaged-they
‘In addition to causing a financial loss, they also damaged our reputation.’

The subordinate clause

237

Whereas (16b) can be remedied by extraposing the embedded clause to the right
edge of the phrase containing it, in the case of (16a) this is not enough:
(17) a. ?? Kicsinek tűnt [DP [DP annak a valószı́nűsége] [CP hogy Jánost
little
seemed
that-DAT the probability
that John-ACC
felveszik az orvosi egyetemre]] számunkra.
admit-they the medical school-to to.us
b.

[AdvP [AdvP Azon
túl] [CP hogy anyagi kárt
okoztak]] a
that-SUPERESS beyond that financial loss-ACC caused-they our
hı́rnevünket
is tönkretették.
reputation-ACC also damaged-they

The trouble with (17a) must be that the subordinate clause extraposed to the right
edge of the noun phrase is still internal to the VP. Whereas a subordinate clause
center-embedded in a VP is still comprehensible as opposed to a subordinate
clause center-embedded in a noun phrase or an adverbial phrase, it is, nevertheless,
marginal – so the following generalization emerges:
(18)

That-clause Constraint
A that-clause cannot be internal to a lexical projection.

(It remains to be examined to what extent (18) can be extended to languages other
than Hungarian; (18) is not expected to hold in languages in which argument
clauses are not associated with a nominal element.)
In order to satisfy (18), the subordinate clause on the right periphery of the noun
phrase in (17a) must be extraposed once more, this time to the right edge of the VP:
(19)

Kicsinek tűnt [DP annak a valószı́nűsége] számunkra, [CP hogy Jánost
little
seemed that-DAT the probability-POSS to.us
that John-ACC
felveszik az orvosi egyetemre]
admit-they to medical school

The that-clause Constraint in (18) does not rule out a constituent with a right
peripheral subordinate clause sitting in the specifier of a functional projection –
still a complex noun phrase in Spec,FP is ungrammatical; the requirement that the
focus constituent be head-final forces extraposition:
(20) a. * [Spec,FP [DP CSAK ANNAK A VALÓSZÍNŰSÉGE [CP HOGY JÁNOST
only that-DAT the probability
that John-ACC
FELVESZIK AZ ORVOSI EGYETEMRE]]] tűnt
kicsinek számunkra.
admit-they the medical school-to
seemed little
to.us
‘It was only the probability of John being admitted to medical school that seemed
little to us.’
b.

[Spec,FP [DP CSAK ANNAK A VALÓSZÍNŰSÉGE]] tűnt kicsinek a számunkra
[CP HOGY JÁNOST FELVESZIK AZ ORVOSI EGYETEMRE]

238

The syntax of Hungarian

A clausal constituent modified by the distributive particle is ‘also’ or még. . .is
‘even’ is also ungrammatical, or marginal, in Spec,DistP – presumably because
the particle is is unable to cliticize to the right edge of a clause:
(21) a. *? [Spec,DistP [DP Annak a valószı́nűsége, [CP hogy János
felveszik az
that-DAT the probability-POSS that John-ACC admit-they the
orvosi egyetemre]], is] kicsi.
medical school-to
also small
‘Also the probability of John being admitted to medical school is small.’
b. *? [Spec,DistP [DP Annak a valószı́nűsége] is, [CP hogy Jánost felveszik az orvosi
egyetemre]], kicsi.
c. [Spec,DistP [DP Annak a valószı́nűsége] is] kicsi, [CP hogy Jánost felveszik az
orvosi egyetemre]

A constituent with a peripheral embedded clause moved to Spec,TopP, on the
other hand, does not violate any constraint. Nevertheless, the extraposition of the
embedded clause is also an option in such cases. Marginally, also extraposition to
the left is possible, particularly from Spec,TopP position.
(22) a.

[Spec,TopP [DP Annak a valószı́nűsége, [CP hogy Jánost felveszik az orvosi
egyetemre]]], kicsinek tűnt számunkra.
‘The probability of it that John would be admitted to medical school seemed little
to us.’

b.

[Spec,TopP [DP Annak a valószı́nűsége]] kicsinek tűnt számunkra, [CP hogy Jánost
felveszik az orvosi egyetemre]

c.

[CP Hogy Jánost felveszik az orvosi egyetemre], [Spec,TopP [DP annak a
valószı́nűsége]] kicsinek tűnt számunkra.
‘That John would be admitted to medical school, its probability seemed little
to us.’

If a clause extraposed from the specifier of a functional projection is adjoined to
the given projection, it follows that in the case of multiple extraposition, the higher
its source, the more external the extraposed clause will be. Indeed, this is what we
attest:
(23) a.

CSAK ABBÓLi gondolom proj [hogy János beteg]j [HOGY NEM JELENT MEG
only that-from think-I
that John sick
that not showed up
AZ ÓRÁN]i
at class
‘Only from that do I think that John is sick that he did not show up at class.’

b. * CSAK ABBÓLi gondolom proj [HOGY NEM JELENT MEG AZ ÓRÁN]i
only that-from think-I
that not showed up at class
[hogy János beteg]j
that John sick
‘Only from that do I think that he did not show up at class that John is sick.’

The subordinate clause

239

10.2.3 Interrogative that-clauses
Embedded questions are also subordinated to the matrix predicate by
the complementizer hogy. In Hungarian wh-questions the interrogative phrase
occupies Spec,FP, hence it will follow hogy, and possibly even topic constituents
can intervene between them; for example:
(24)

János azt
kérdezte, [CP hogy [Top Péter [FP melyik egyetemre készül]]]
that
Peter
which university-to applies
John that-ACC asked
‘John asked to which university Peter would apply.’

Non-embedded yes–no questions are marked by a special rise and fall in the intonation of the last two syllables of the sentence, or by a particle -e cliticized to
the right-hand side of the verb. In embedded questions only the latter option is
available; for example:
(25)

János meg kérdezte, [CP hogy [TopP Péter [FP orvosi egyetemre
John VM asked
that
Peter
medical school-to
[VP jelentkezett-e ]]]]
applied-Q
‘John asked if Peter has applied to medical school.’

As in other languages, such embedded questions occur only in the context of matrix
verbs selecting a question, among them kérdez ‘ask’, tud ‘know’, megmond ‘tell’,
kı́váncsi ‘be curious’, etc.; compare:
(26) a.

János azt
kérdezte tőlünk a szı́nház után, hogy hogyan tetszett az
John that-ACC asked of.us the theater after that how pleased the
előadás.
performance
‘John asked of us after the theater how the performance pleased us.’

b. * János azt
mondta, hogy hogyan tetszett az előadás.
John that-ACC said
that how pleased the performance
‘John said that how the performance pleased us.’

That is, there is a link between the matrix verb and the interrogative phrase in the
Spec,FP of the embedded clause, or the interrogative particle cliticized to the embedded verb – despite the intervening maximal projections. The link is presumably
established through the CP projection of the embedded question; perhaps hogy is
marked as [+/–wh]; or perhaps it has an invisible interrogative operator adjoined
to it.3
In the sentence type illustrated in (24), (25), and (26a), containing an interrogative clause associated with a personal or demonstrative pronoun, interrogation
3

See Lipták (2000).

240

The syntax of Hungarian

is a matter internal to the subordinate clause; the interrogative operator has
scope only over the embedded proposition. If the subordinate question is associated with a matrix interrogative pronoun instead of the demonstrative or personal pronoun, on the other hand, interrogation has matrix scope. As Horvath
(1995, 1997, 1998) has shown, in such cases the subordinate question bears the
same kind of relation to the interrogative pronoun that other types of subordinate
clauses bear to the demonstrative or personal pronoun coindexed with them;4 for
instance:
(27) a.

b.

János mit
ı́gért,
(hogy) hányra
érkezik?
John what-ACC promised that by.what.time arrives
‘By what time did John promise that he would arrive?’
Mire
számı́tasz, (hogy) mekkora fizetésemelést kapsz?
what-on count-you that how.big pay.raise-ACC get-you
‘How big a pay raise do you count on getting?’

The interrogative clause can be multiply embedded, in which case each superordinate clause contains an interrogative pronoun associated with the next lower
question:
(28)

Miti
mondott Éva, [hogy mitj
hallott, [hogy mitk
ı́gért
what-ACC said
Eve that what-ACC heard-she that what-ACC promised
János, [hogy hányra érkezik]k ]j ]i ?
John that by.when arrives
‘By what time did Eve say that she heard that John promised that he would arrive?’

This construction is not permitted with verbs selecting a [+wh] complement;
compare:
(29) a. * János mit kérdezett, hányra érkeznek a vendégek?
John what asked
by.when arrive
the guests
‘By what time did John ask that the guests would arrive?’
b. * Mire vagytok kı́váncsiak, kiket
hı́vtam meg?
what-of are-you curious
who-PL-ACC invited-I VM
‘Whom do you wonder that I invited?’

This fact is interpreted by Horvath (1995, 1997, 1998) to indicate that the whoperator of the embedded sentence has matrix scope, i.e., in a sense, the matrix
wh-phrase serves as a scope marker for the embedded question. At the same time,
as Horvath argues, the two wh-phrases do not form a chain (they differ in case
4

For the first analysis of this Hungarian construction, referred to as ‘partial wh-movement’
in recent literature, see Marácz (1988).

The subordinate clause

241

and theta role). The locality relation between the two wh-phrases is also different from the locality relation between two chain links. Namely, although the
lower wh-phrase cannot be embedded in a complex NP, it can be embedded in an
adjunct:
(30)

* Mit
mondott Éva, mit
hallotta [DP a hı́rt
[hogy János
what-ACC said
Eve what-ACC heard-she the news-ACC that John
hányra érkezik?]]
by.when arrives
‘By what time did Eve say that she heard the news that John would arrive?’
but:

(31)

Miért voltál
dühös, mert
mire
akartak
rávenni?
why were-you angry because what-into wanted-they to.reason
‘Why were you angry? What did they want to persuade you to do?’

This ‘subjacency paradox’ cannot be accounted for if the matrix wh-phrase and
the embedded wh-phrase are assumed to form a chain, but is easily explained if the
embedded question is analyzed as the associate of the wh-pronoun, as proposed
by Horvath (1995). Namely, the wh-pronoun can only be associated with a [+wh]
clause; however, in (30) its potential associate is a [–wh] complex noun phrase; that
is why it is ruled out. Example (31) is grammatical because nothing is extracted
from the adjunct clause (if it is moved in LF, it is moved as a whole).
Horvath (1995) claims that the wh-phrase and the wh-clause are in the same
relation that holds between an expletive and its associate, e.g. in a there is construction. Namely, the principle of full interpretation requires that at LF the whole
wh-clause be left-adjoined to the wh-expletive, as represented in (32b):
(32) a.
b.

wh-expl . . .[CPi wh-phrasej . . .ej . . .]. . .]. . .
LF: [[[CP wh-phrasej . . .ej . . .]i wh-expl]. . .ei . . .]. . .

The wh-feature of the interrogative operator of the embedded clause is transferred
to the CP node, as a result of which CP assumes an operator feature, whereas the
interrogative phrase in Spec,FP/CP ceases to be an operator – that is why it can
only complement a verb selecting a non-wh-proposition (compare Horvath 1995).
The identification of the matrix wh-phrase with the embedded question results
in assigning to the clausal interrogative operator the scope corresponding to the
c-command domain of the matrix wh-pronoun. In the case of multiple embedding,
the association of the matrix wh-pronoun with the embedded wh-question takes
place from bottom up, in every cycle. The lack of an interrogative pronoun in an
intermediate cycle results in ungrammaticality:

242

The syntax of Hungarian

(33)

* Mit
mondott Éva, hogy hallott(a),
hogy mit
ı́gért
János,
what-ACC said
Eve that heard(DEF)-she that what-ACC promised John
hogy hányra érkezik?
that by.when arrives-he

10.2.4 Adjunct that-clauses
That-clauses can also accompany verbs that do not select a complement
other than an agent. In such cases the that-clause need not be associated with a
pronoun – obviously because the matrix verb has no case to assign; compare:
(34)

János csengetett/szólt
/mutogatott, hogy menjünk
be.
John rang
/called.out /signalled that go-SUBJ-1PL in
‘John rang/called out/signalled that we should go in.’

The that-clause associated with the intransitive verbs in (34) is not a complement
of the verb; it does not express the theme of the action; it is an adjunct loosely
related to the verb, specifying the meaning, or the purpose of the action denoted
by the verb.5
A group of matrix verbs is optionally transitive. When they are used transitively,
they take a that-clause complement associated with an accusative pronoun (35a,
36a). The pronoun is dropped in postverbal position; nevertheless, its presence
can be reconstructed from the objective conjugation of the matrix verb. When
used intransitively, these verbs can be accompanied by an adjunct that-clause.
The adjunct that-clause is not associated with a pronoun, hence, the verb is in the
subjective conjugation (35b, 36b).
(35) a.

b.

5

János (azt)
telefonálta,
hogy ötkor érkezik.
John (that-ACC) phone-PAST-DEF-3SG that five-at arrives
‘John phoned (it) that he would arrive at five.’
János telefonált,
hogy ötkor érkezik.
John phone-PAST-INDEF.3SG that five-at arrives
‘John phoned that he would arrive at five.’

Szól ‘say’ can take a non-specific indefinite object in some idiom-like expressions such
as mit szólsz ‘what do you say’, nem szólt semmit ‘he didn’t say anything’; however, it is
clearly ungrammatical with a specific object; compare:
(i)

* János ezt
szólta.
John this-ACC said
‘John said this.’

(ii)

* János mindent
szólt.
John everything-ACC said
‘John said everything.’

The subordinate clause
(36) a.

b.

243

János (azt)
üzente,
hogy ötkor érkezik.
John that-ACC send.message-PAST-DEF-3SG that five-at arrives
‘John sent the message that he would arrive at five.’
János üzent,
hogy ötkor érkezik.
John send.message-PAST-INDEF.3SG that five-at arrives
‘John sent a message that he would arrive at five.’

Another group of predicates can optionally take an oblique complement. If their
complement is represented by a subordinate clause, the oblique case selected by
the matrix predicate is realized on the pronoun belonging to the clause. In this
case the pronoun + subordinate clause complex is analyzed as an argument. If the
pronoun is missing, the clause functions as an adjunct loosely associated with the
predicate; compare:
(37) a.

Mari büszke volt (rá), hogy a gyerekei ilyen jó eredményt értek
el.
Mary proud was (on.it) that her children such good result-ACC achieved VM
‘Mary was proud (of it) that her children achieved such a good result.’

b.

Mari dicsekedett/hencegett (vele), hogy a gyerekei milyen jó eredményt
Mary bragged/showed.off (with.it) that her children what good result
értek
el.
achieved VM
‘Mary was bragging/showing off what a good result her children achieved.’

c.

Mari panaszkodott (róla), hogy a gyerekei milyen rossz eredményt
Mary complained (about.it) that her children what bad result-ACC
értek
el.
achieved VM
‘Mary complained (about it) what a bad result her children achieved.’

d.

Mari kiváncsi volt (rá), hogy a gyerekei milyen eredményt
Mary curious was (on.it) that her children what result-ACC
értek
el.
achieved VM
‘Mary was curious (of it) what result her children achieved.’

10.3

Relative clauses

Relative clauses are introduced by a relative phrase which simultaneously
fills an argument or adjunct slot in the embedded clause and functions as a subordinating operator. The relative phrase is raised to Spec,CP – presumably to have
its [+complementizer] feature checked. The relative pronoun is formally a whpronoun with an optional a- prefix, which is an obsolete pronominal element. (It is

244

The syntax of Hungarian

the remnant of the demonstrative az, which functioned originally as the head of the
relative, then came to be cliticized to the pronoun, and is interpreted by present-day
speakers merely as an optional morpheme distinguishing relative pronouns from
interrogative ones.) For example:
(38)

[CP (A)ki [TopP másnak [AspP vermet ás ]]], maga esik bele.
who
other-DAT pit-ACC digs himself falls in.it
‘Who digs a pit for someone else, falls in it himself.’

In fact, the relative phrase could marginally also follow one or more of the topicalized constituents of the relative clause; i.e., Másnak aki vermet ás. . . would also be
an acceptable variant of (38). Therefore, Kenesei (1994) does not raise the relative
phrase into Spec,CP; he adjoins it to IP (which would correspond to topicalizing it
in the present framework). The fact that the post-topic position of a relative phrase
is rare and sounds archaic nevertheless suggests that its topicalization is merely
a marked alternative of its movement to Spec,CP. As is well known (e.g. from
Horvath 1986a), relative phrases and interrogative phrases do not share the same
position in the Hungarian sentence. If the subject of the subordinate clause in (38)
were an interrogative phrase, the clause would have the following structure:
[CP [TopP Másnak [FP ki [VP ás vermet]]]]?6
other-DAT who digs pit-ACC
‘Who digs a pit for someone else?’

(39)

Relative clauses share the behavior of that-clauses in various respects. They form
a constituent with a pronominal or a lexical phrase at some level of representation,
although they often get extraposed from it. Free relatives are associated with a
demonstrative pronoun, whose function is to pick up the case assigned by the
matrix predicate to the argument represented by the relative clause, and to represent
the clause in various internal positions of the matrix sentence that are not available
for clausal complements:
(40) a.

b.

6

[Spec,TopP Azt/pro, amiről
beszéltünk], felejtsd
el!
that-ACC what-about talked-we forget-IMPER-2SG VM
‘Forget what we talked about!’
[Spec,DistP Arról
is] tudok, [ami a szı́nfalak mögött történt]
that-about also know-I what the scenes behind happened
‘I also know about what happened behind the scenes.’

This difference between the positions of Hungarian relative wh-phrases and interrogative
wh-phrases leads Horvath (1986a) to the conclusion that, universally, a wh-phrase can
function as an interrogative operator only if it also has a [+focus] feature.

The subordinate clause

245

c.

[Spec,FP CSAK AZT]
hiszem el, [AMIT A SAJÁT SZEMEMMEL LÁTTAM].
saw-I
only that-ACC believe-I VM what my own eye-with
‘Only that do I believe what I saw with my own eyes.’

d.

Nem hiszek [abban, amit mond ]
not believe-I that-in what says-he
‘I don’t believe in what he says.’

e.

Felejtsd el [azt/pro, amiről
beszéltünk]
forget VM that
what-about talked-we
‘Forget what we talked about!’

In (40a) the pronoun + relative clause complex functions as a topicalized object;
in (40b) it functions as an oblique distributive phrase; in (40c) it is a focussed
object; in (40d) it is a VP-internal oblique complement; and in (40e) it is a VPinternal object. Whereas the VP-internal pronoun associated with a that-clause is
a personal pronoun, a relative clause is always associated with a demonstrative –
whether the pronoun is in preverbal or postverbal position. Pro-drop is possible in
the VP or in Spec,TopP if the pronoun can be reconstructed from the conjugation
of the V – i.e., if it is a subject or object pronoun (40a,e). The fact that an oblique
pronoun associated with a relative clause with no lexical head cannot be omitted
indicates that Hungarian has no true free relatives; apparent free relatives have a
pro head.
Lexical noun phrases modified by a relative clause also contain a demonstrative
element:
(41) a.

az a könyv, amelyet
olvasok
that the book which-ACC read-I
‘that book which I am reading’

b.

annyi könyv, ahányat
te egy évben el olvasol
so.many book as.many-ACC you one year-in VM read
‘so many books as you read in one year’

c.

egy olyan könyv, amilyet
olvasok
a such book which-ACC read-I
‘such a book that I am reading’

The function of the demonstrative element is to indicate which layer of the noun
phrase the relative clause modifies. The pro-adjective olyan indicates that the
relative clause is to be adjoined to NP, annyi expresses that the relative clause is to
be adjoined to NumP, whereas az expresses that it is to be adjoined to DP. These
are the structures associated with (41a–c):

246

The syntax of Hungarian
DP

(42) a.
DP
D'

Spec

az
that

CP
Spec

AspP

D

NP

a
the

könyv amelyet
book which

olvasok
read-I

‘that book which I am reading’
NumP

b.

CP

NumP
Spec

Num

NP

annyi
so.many

egy évben
könyv ahányat te
book as.many you one year-in

TopP

elolvasol
read

‘so many books as you read in one year’

c.

NumP
Num

NP
NP

egy
a

CP

AdjP

N

Spec

AspP

olyan
such

könyv
book

amilyet
which

olvasok
read-I

‘such a book that I am reading’

The demonstrative in (42a) is sometimes omitted – presumably because the definite
determiner can take over its function.
Non-restrictive relative clauses, e.g. relatives adjoined to proper names, differ
from restrictive ones in that the noun phrase to which they are adjoined has no
demonstrative element; for example:
(43)

Kodályt,
aki a Köröndön lakott, sokszor
láttam a környéken
Kodály-ACC who the Körönd-on lived many.times saw-I the neighborhood-in
sétálni.
to.walk
‘Kodály, who lived on Körönd square, I often saw walking in the neighborhood.’

The subordinate clause

247

A demonstrative element in front of the proper name would mean that the person
denoted by the noun phrase + CP complex is one of several persons of the same
name:
Azt a Kodályt,
aki a Köröndön lakott, . . .
that the Kodály-ACC who the Körönd-on lived
‘the Kodály who lived on Körönd square’

(44)

A relative clause appears to form a closer syntactic and phonological unit
with the demonstrative or lexical noun phrase to which it belongs than a thatclause; in any case, its extraposition (e.g. from the middle of the VP) is not obligatory. A postmodifying relative clause in Spec,FP, however, is ungrammatical, because it violates the requirement that the focus constituent be head-final;
compare:
(45)

* [Spec,FP CSAK AZ, [AKI UTOLSÓNAK LÉPETT
FEL]], kapott nagy tapsot.
only that who last
performed VM got great applause-ACC
‘Only he who performed last got great applause.’

The construction is better if the relative clause is left-adjoined to the constituent in Spec,FP, allowing it to be head-final (46a), but the unmarked solution
is extraposition:
(46) a.
b.
c.

[Spec,FP CSAK [AKI UTOLSÓKÉNT LÉPETT FEL], AZ] kapott nagy tapsot.
[Spec,FP CSAK AZ] kapott nagy tapsot, [AKI UTOLSÓNAK LÉPETT FEL]
[AKI UTOLSÓKÉNT LÉPETT FEL], [Spec,FP CSAK AZ] kapott nagy tapsot.

Apart from this case, extraposition is a possible, but non-obligatory option for
restrictive relative clauses; compare:
(47) a.

[Spec,TopP Azt a tornászt,
aki elsőnek szerepel], mindig le
pontozza
that the gymnast-ACC who first performs always down marks
néhány bı́ró.
some judge
‘The gymnast who performs first is always marked down by some judges.’

b.

[Spec,TopP Azt a tornászt] mindig lepontozza néhány bı́ró, [aki elsőnek szerepel]

Non-restrictive clauses are less mobile. Since the modifier–modifiee relation is
not marked on the noun phrase to which the non-restrictive relative belongs, extraposition would make it hard to reconstruct the original position of the relative
clause. Nevertheless, extraposition from Spec,FP is forced by the requirement that
the focus constituent be head-final; compare:

248

The syntax of Hungarian

(48) a. ? [Spec,TopP Kodállyal] sokszor találkoztam a környéken,
[aki a
Kodály-with often met-I
the neighborhood-in who the
Köröndön lakott].
Körönd-on lived
‘With Kodály, who lived on Körönd square, I often met in the neighborhood.’
b.

10.4

[Spec,FP CSAK KODÁLLYAL] találkoztam sokszor, [AKI A KÖRÖNDÖN LAKOTT].
only Kodály-with met-I
often
who the Körönd-on lived
‘Only with Kodály, who lived on Körönd square, did I often meet.’

Adverbial clauses

Adverbial clauses are mostly relative clauses with an optional head.
The relative pro-adverb introducing them is an adjunct of the embedded predicate, raised to Spec,CP. The head is the demonstrative equivalent of the relative
adverb; for example:
(49) a.

b.

A parlagfű [AdvP ott is] meg jelenik, [ahol azelőtt soha nem tapasztalták].
the ragweed
there too up shows where before never not attested-they
‘Ragweed shows up also where it has never been attested.’
Sokan [AdvP CSAK AKKOR] irtják
a parlagfüvet, [AMIKOR MÁR
many
only then
extirpate the ragweed
when already
ELHULLATTA A MAGJÁT].
shed-it
its seed
‘Many extirpate ragweed only when it has already shed its seeds.’

Since the relative adverb introducing the embedded clause expresses the adverbial
function that the clause plays in the matrix sentence, the pro-adverb associated
with the clause as its head is semantically redundant; its role is merely to represent
the clausal complement in positions that are not available for clausal constituents –
as is the case in (49a,b), where it stands in the Spec,DistP, and Spec,FP positions
of the matrix sentence, respectively. In other sentence positions the spelling-out of
the pro-adverb is optional:
(50) a.

b.

[(Ott) [ahol meg bolygatták a talajt]], meg jelenik a parlagfű.
there where up broke-they the soil
up shows the ragweed
‘Where the soil has been broken up, ragweed appears.’
[(Akkor) [amikor a parlagfű már
el virágzott]], késő irtani.
then
when the ragweed already VM flowered late to.extirpate
‘When ragweed has already flowered, it is late to extirpate it.’

In certain cases, the relative pronoun introducing the adverbial relative cannot in
fact be interpreted as an adjunct of the embedded proposition; for example:

The subordinate clause
(51) a.

249

(Azóta) amióta
meg érkezett, még nem szólt egy szót sem.
since.that since.what VM arrived-he yet not said-he a word neither
‘Since he arrived he hasn’t said a word yet.’

b.

(Azelőtt) mielőtt
a szomszédunkba költöztek, vidéken laktak.
before.that before.what our neighborhood-to moved-they country-in lived-they
‘Before they moved to our neighborhood, they lived in the country.’

c.

(Azután) miután letette
az utolsó vizsgáját, nem vett
szakkönyvet
after.that after.what passed-he his last exam
not took-he technical-book
a kezébe.
his hand-in
‘After he passed his last exam, he did not touch a technical book.’

Although ami-óta ‘since when’, mi-előtt ‘before what’, mi-után ‘after what’ are
formally relative pronouns merged with a postposition, they do not denote the
time of the event described in the relative clause. Megérkezik ‘arrive’, költözik
‘move’, letesz ‘pass’ express momentary actions, which cannot combine with
since, before, and after phrases, expressing duration. Consequently, the apparently
relative elements introducing these clauses are not relative pronouns extracted
from inside the subordinate proposition, but must be adverbial complementizers
generated in C or Spec,CP. (They consist of a pronominal element mi- ‘what’,
to which the clause bears an appositive relation, and a postposition expressing
the temporal relation that the event described in the clause bears to the matrix
predicate.)
Interestingly, there is a parallelism requirement concerning the matrix pronominal element and the complementizer: they must bear the same case or postposition:
(52) a.

b.

Akkorra, amikorra elmentek a vendégek, a háziak teljesen
by.then by.when left
the guests
the hosts completely
kimerültek.
got.exhausted
‘By the time the guests left, the hosts became completely exhausted.’
Azért késett
el, mert
lekéste a buszt.
that-for late.was-he VM what-for missed the bus
‘He was late because he missed the bus.’

(53) a. * Akkorra, amikor elmentek a vendégek. . .
by.then when left
the guests
b. * Azelőtt, amikor férjhez ment . . .
before.that when married got-she

If these sentences are introduced by a contentive adverbial complementizer indicating the function of the embedded clause in the matrix sentence, then the question
is what role the demonstrative pro-adverb optionally associated with them plays.

250

The syntax of Hungarian

Obviously, adverbial clauses can be generated in an appositive relation with a
matching AdvP or PP for the same reason as adverbial relatives proper can be
associated with a head: because occasionally the clause must be represented in a
slot of the matrix sentence that is not available for clausal complements. This was
the case in (52b), and this is the case in (54):
(54)

[Spec,FP CSAK AZUTÁN] doktorált
le, [MIUTÁN SZÜLT
only after.that took.Ph.D-she VM after.what bore-she
HÁROM GYEREKET]
three children
‘It was only after bearing three children that she took her Ph.D.’

An adverbial clause introduced by a complementizer that is not of the form
(a)mi + Kase/P, i.e., that cannot be identified formally with a relative pronoun,
cannot be associated with a demonstrative AdvP or PP, hence it cannot be focussed
or used as a distributive phrase; for example:
(55) a.

b.

10.5

Mihelyt le
ült, rá gyújtott egy cigarettára.
as.soon.as down sat-he VM lit-he a cigarette-on
‘As soon as he sat down, he lit a cigarette.’
Minthogy/Mivel fáradt volt, le
feküdt.
as
/because tired was-he down lay-he
‘As he was tired, he went to bed.’

Long operator movement

10.5.1 The types of operators subject to long movement
It is an old observation of Hungarian grammarians7 that the material of the
subordinate clause and that of the matrix clause can ‘intertwine’. More precisely,
material from the embedded clause can appear in the preverbal, operator domain of
the matrix clause; i.e., certain types of complex sentences form a single domain for
operator movement. Every type of operator can undergo long movement, among
them the focus:
(56) a.

7

[FP KITi szeretnél [CP hogy meg hı́vjunk ti a
születésnapodra?]]
whom would.like-you that VM invite-we your birthday-for
‘Whom would you like that we invite for your birthday?’

See Zolnay (1926), as well as de Groot (1981), É. Kiss (1987a, 1991c), Haader (1998),
etc.

The subordinate clause
b.

251

[TopP János [FP CSAK MARITi nem engedte [CP hogy meg hı́vjam ti ]]]
John
only Mary-ACC not allowed
that VM invite-I
‘It was only Mary that John didn’t allow that I invite.’

The wh-phrase in (56a) and the only phrase in (56b) take matrix scope; thus, the
scope of the only phrase extends over the matrix negation. The extraction of the
wh-phrase out of (56a) is in fact obligatory, given that the matrix verb selects
a non-interrogative complement. (Another strategy of satisfying the selectional
restriction of the matrix verb would be to move the wh-phrase into the Spec,FP
position of the embedded clause, and to associate the clause with a matrix interrogative pronoun; see Section 10.2.3 above.)
Positive and negative distributive quantifiers originating in the embedded sentence can also land in the Spec,DistP and Spec,NegP positions of the matrix clause:
(57) a.

b.

[DistP Jánost isi szeretném [CP ha meg hı́vnánk ti ]]
John-ACC too would.like-I if VM invited-we
‘John, too, I would like us to invite.’
[TopP János [DistNegP semelyikkollégámat
semi engedte [CP hogy
John
no
colleague.my-ACC not allowed
that
meghı́vjam ti ]]]
invite-I
‘None of my colleagues did John allow me to invite.’

In the case of (57b), long operator movement is in fact unavoidable, because
the negative quantifier generated in the embedded clause is required to move
to Spec,DistNegP – however, the embedded clause does not contain a NegP
projection.
The long movement of an aspectual operator (constituted by a verb modifier)
is licensed only by modal matrix verbs (those that also license it in infinitival
constructions; compare Sections 9.2–9.4). In the case of verb modifier movement
into a matrix Spec,AspP the embedded and the matrix predicates form a single
domain for aspect marking – i.e., they form a kind of complex predicate (58a,b).
Accordingly, the embedded clause cannot contain logical operators, e.g. a focus
or a quantifier, and even a topic intervening between the embedded verb and the
complementizer decreases acceptability (58c,d).
(58) a.

b.

[TopP János [AspP megi akarja [CP hogy beszéljük ti a problémákat]]]
John
over wants
that talk-we
the problems
‘John wants us to talk over the problems.’
[AspP Megi kell [CP hogy beszéljük ti a problémákat]]
over needs that talk-we
the problems
‘It is necessary that we talk over the problems.’

252

The syntax of Hungarian
c. * [AspP Megi kell [CP hogy [FP CSAK A PROBLÉMÁKAT [beszéljük ti ]]]]
over needs that
only the problems-ACC talk-we
‘It is necessary that it be only the problems that we talk over.’
d. ? [AspP Megi kell [CP hogy [TopP a fiúk beszéljék ti a problémákat]]]
over needs that
the boys talk
the problems
‘It is necessary that the boys talk over the problems.’

Unlike local VM movement into Spec,AspP, VM climbing across a finite clause
boundary is not obligatory. Furthermore, the less independent semantic content the
climbing verb modifier has, the more marginal the output of long VM movement
will be. Den Dikken (1999b: footnote 28) interprets these facts as evidence that
a verb modifier undergoing long movement actually lands in the matrix focus
position.
The topic of the matrix sentence can also originate in the embedded clause; for
example:
(59) a.

b.

[TopP Jánossali nem akarom [CP hogy meg beszéljünk bármit is ti ]]
John-with not want-I
that over talk-we
anything
‘With John, I don’t want us to discuss anything.’
[TopP Mariti
PÉTER ı́gérte
meg [CP hogy fel hı́vja ti ]]
Mary-ACC Peter promised VM
that up calls
‘Mary, PETER promised to call up.’

10.5.2 Constraints on long operator movement
Since extraction is universally subject to the Condition on Extraction
Domains (CED), adjunct clauses are expected to block the long operator movement
of their constituents. Indeed, an adjunct that-clause, or an adverbial clause is
impermeable for long operator movement:
(60) a. * A kollégáim EGY DIÁKi figyelmeztettek [CP hogy keresett ti ]
my colleagues a student warned-me
that sought-me
‘My colleagues warned me that a student was looking for me.’
b. * Mindenkii el indulunk [CP mihelyt megérkezett ti ]
everybody off go-we
as.soon.as arrived
‘We leave as soon as everybody has arrived.’

Since the subject is in the government domain of the verb in Hungarian, subject
clauses are not expected to be affected by the CED. Indeed, they allow extraction:
(61) a.

Jánosi nyilvánvaló [CP hogy nagyon tehetséges ti ]
John obvious
that very talented
‘It is obvious that John is very talented.’

The subordinate clause
b.

253

JÁNOSTi a legvalószı́nűbb [CP hogy felveszik az egyetemre ti ]
John-ACC the likeliest
that admit-they the university-to
‘John is the likeliest to be admitted to the university.’

At the same time, it is not the case that all types of argument clauses are potential
sources of long extraction. The set of bridge verbs attested in Hungarian is similar
to that found in other languages. It includes primarily modal predicates taking
a subject or object clause, among them akar ‘want’, szeretne ‘would like’, kell
‘need’, szabad ‘may’, lehet ‘is possible’, nyilvánvaló ‘is obvious’, valószı́nű ‘is
likely’, as well as verbs of saying and verbs denoting mental activities, among them
mond ‘say’, ı́gér ‘promise’, állı́t ‘claim’, gondol ‘think’, hisz ‘believe’, etc. These
predicates do not necessarily introduce an event different from that expressed in
the subordinate clause; they serve to report the event described in their subordinate
clause, or to evaluate it, or to modify it by a modal operator, etc. The fact that at
least on the conceptual level sentences allowing long operator movement involve
a complex proposition describing a single event is confirmed by the fact that long
operator movement is more acceptable from subjunctive and conditional sentences
than from sentences with an independent tense; compare:
(62) a.

János HOLNAPi akarja [CP hogy induljunk ti ]
John tomorrow wants
that leave-SUBJ-we
‘It is tomorrow that John wants us to leave.’

b.

János HOLNAPi szeretné [CP ha indulnánk ti ]
John tomorrow would.like if leave-COND-we
‘It is tomorrow that John would like us to leave.’

c. ? János HOLNAPi mondta [CP hogy indulunk ti ]
John tomorrow said
that leave-we
‘It is tomorrow that John said we leave.’

In the framework in which argument clauses are embedded under a noun phrase,
bearing an appositive relation to a pronoun, extraction from an argument clause is
expected to be blocked by the Complex Noun Phrase Constraint (CNPC). Indeed,
the pronoun associated with the argument clause, i.e., the head of the complex
noun phrase, cannot be spelled out in the case of extraction:
(63) a. * Aztj
János HOLNAPi akarja [CP hogy induljunk ti ]j
that-ACC John tomorrow wants
that leave-we
b. * Azj
JÁNOSTi a legvalószı́nűbb [CP hogy felveszik az egyetemre ti ]j
that-NOM John-ACC the likeliest
that admit-they the university-to

The blocking effect of the pronoun would follow from the CNPC only under the
assumption that a projection containing no phonologically realized material is
transparent for subjacency. Then the noun phrase subsuming the argument clause

254

The syntax of Hungarian

would activate the CNPC only when its nominal head is spelled out phonologically.
(Naturally, the transparency of phonologically vacuous projections would have to
be confirmed by independent evidence. It should, for instance, be examined if the
English that-trace effect could be reinterpreted along these lines.)
In the framework proposed by Lipták (1998), the CNPC has no role to play.
The complementarity of long extraction from a that-clause, and the presence of
an expletive pronoun follow from the assumption both that extraction proceeds
through Spec,CP, and that the expletive pronoun is located in Spec,CP.
Given that a wh-phrase occupies Spec,FP instead of Spec,CP, the Spec,CP of an
embedded question is available as an escape hatch, hence an embedded question
is not an island; compare:
(64) a.

b.

[FP Kiti nem tudsz [CP ti hogy mikor vizsgázik ti ?]]
whom not know-you that when sits.for.exam
‘Whom do you wonder when (he) will sit the exam?’
[DistNegP Senkit
semi tudok [CP ti hogy mikor vizsgázik ti ]]
nobody-ACCnot know-I
that when sits.for.exam
‘Of nobody do I know when he sits the exam.’

10.5.3 The procedure of long operator movement
In view of the facts considered so far, it seems likely that long operator
movement involves the extraction of a constituent from the VP of the embedded
clause through Spec,CP into a matrix operator position. The fact that for example
a wh-phrase can be extracted across a wh-phrase occupying the Spec,FP of the
lower sentence into the matrix Spec,FP indicates that it does not have to use the
lower Spec,FP position as an intermediate landing site. This is also confirmed
by the interaction of the constituent undergoing long focus movement with the
embedded aspectual operator:
(65) a.

Kiti akarsz [CP ti hogy [AspP haza menjen ti ]]?
whom want-you that
home go-SUBJ-3SG
‘Whom do you want to go home?’
compare:

b.

Kii [VP ment haza ti ]?
who went home

If kit ‘whom’ had landed temporarily in Spec,FP in the lower cycle, no AspP projection would have been generated, because it cannot be projected in the presence
of an FP.
Whereas the raised constituent skips the operator positions in the embedded
clause, it must pass through every Spec,CP on the way to its landing site, its
extraction must be licensed by bridge verbs, and it must observe the CED and the

The subordinate clause

255

CNPC on every cycle, as happens in (66):
(66)

JÁNOSTÓLi mondták, [CP ti hogy szeretnék, [CP ti ha ajánlást
John-from said-they
that would.like-they if recommendation-ACC
hoznék ti ]]
brought-I
‘It is John that they said that they would like if I brought a recommendation from.’

An intervening non-bridge verb, such as figyelmeztet ‘warn’, taking an adjunct
that-clause, blocks extraction:
(67)

* JÁNOSTÓLi mondta, [CP hogy figyelmeztették, [CP ti hogy hozzon
John-from said-he
that warned-they-him
that bring-SUBJ-he
ajánlást ti ]]
recommendation
‘It is John that he said that he was warned that he should bring a recommendation
from.’

Notice the effect of an intervening complex noun phrase (i.e., the effect of an
argument clause being embedded in a non-vacuous noun phrase projection):
(68)

* JÁNOSTÓLi mondták, [CP hogy azt
szeretnék, [CP ti ha ajánlást
John-from said-they
that that-ACC would.like-they if recommendation-ACC
hoznék ti ]]
brought-I
‘It is John that they said that they would like if I brought a recommendation from.’

A subject extracted from an object clause assumes accusative case in the course
of the derivation – as in various British English dialects:
(69)

Kiti javasolsz, [CP ti hogy [elnök
legyen ti ]]?
whom suggest-you
that president become
‘Whom do you suggest should be the president?’

Chomsky (1981: 174) suggests that in such constructions the raised constituent
receives accusative case from the intermediate verb when passing through the
specifier of the lowest CP. It is only a nominative-marked constituent, bearing a
phonologically null case marker, whose case can be superseded by an accusative
assigned by the matrix verb. The case of a raised accusative-marked constituent
obviously remains accusative, and the case of a raised oblique-marked constituent
also remains oblique:
(70)

[FP Kineki
akarod [CP ti hogy [a kitüntetést adjuk ti ?]]]
whom-DAT want-you that the award-ACC give-we
‘Whom do you want that we give the award to?’

256

The syntax of Hungarian

The fact that only a nominative case is subject to case-reassignment follows if
nominative is, indeed, the lack of case, as in the theory of Bittner and Hale (1996).
Lipták (1998) has reinterpreted this account of case change in the Minimalist
framework. She assumes that the C head of a clausal argument with a structural case
has a +D/N categorial feature, as well as case and phi-features. In the unmarked
case, the checking of these features is carried out by the expletive pronoun; e.g.
the case feature of C is checked by the expletive raising to a matrix AgrP. There is
also an alternative option: the features of C can be checked locally, if a constituent
with a matching +D/N feature is raised to Spec,CP from the embedded clause.
The +D/N constituent raised to Spec,CP will enter into spec–head agreement with
C, sharing its case feature – i.e., if a nominative is raised out of an object clause, it
will assume the accusative of C. (Constituents with an oblique case are assumed
to have a +P or +Adv feature instead of +D/N – that is why the long operator
movement of an oblique constituent does not involve a case change.) According
to Lipták’s theory, an accusative raised out of a subject clause should also assume
nominative case in Spec,CP. It does not, which Lipták explains away by claiming
that raising out of a subject clause is marginal, in general.
If the constituent undergoing long operator movement is an object, or subjectturned-object, it will trigger definiteness-agreement on the matrix verb. In complex
sentences containing an object clause and involving no long operator movement,
the matrix verb agrees with the object clause, which counts as definite (71a).
If an indefinite object is raised out of the object clause, the matrix verb will
be in the subjective conjugation used in the presence of a NumP object (71b)
(although for example Bartos (1999a) also accepts the objective conjugation).
Lipták’s framework can easily account for these facts: in the former case the
expletive pronoun generated in the specifier of the object clause; in the latter
case the constituent raised from inside the object clause will land in the matrix
Spec,AgrOP, carrying there its own definiteness feature.
(71) a.

b.

Hallottad,
hogy azt
szeretnék,
hogy
hear-PAST-DEF-2SG that that-ACC like-COND-DEF-3PL that
válasszunk
valakit
elnöknek?
choose-SUBJ-INDEF.1PL someone-ACC president
‘Have you heard that they would like us to choose somebody president?’
Kiti hallottál
[ CP ti hogy szeretnének
[ CP ti hogy
whom hear-PAST-INDEF.2SG that like-COND-INDEF.3PL that
megválasszunk
elnöknek ti ?]]
choose-SUBJ-INDEF.1PL president
‘Whom have you heard that they would like us to choose president?’

The fact that the definiteness feature of a raised object takes precedence over that
of the source clause in movement to Spec,AgrOP is derived by den Dikken (1999a)

The subordinate clause

257

from economy conditions: the trace/copy of the raised object in Spec,CP is closer to
the matrix AgrO than C, which is assumed by him to carry the definiteness feature
of CP. It is not clear how den Dikken would ensure that the hogy complementizer of
an adjunct clause – e.g. that of (35b) – has no [+definite] feature. In the framework
advocated here the definiteness of an object clause derives from the fact that it is
embedded under a DP headed by a pronoun. The problem for the latter view
would be that this DP is closer to AgrO than the object trace in the specifier of the
CP embedded under DP – i.e., the question why the matrix verb agrees with the
object trace instead of the DP containing it would remain unexplained (unless the
constituent triggering agreement is not the object trace in Spec,CP but the raised
object itself ).
Lipták’s approach also solves a further mystery of long operator movement.
Whereas the spelling-out of the complementizer of an argument that-clause is
mostly optional,8 long movement across Spec,CP makes the spelling-out of the
complementizer obligatory:
(72) a.

[FP Jánosti akarom [CP ti hogy [AspP meg válasszuk ti ]]]
John-ACC want-I
that
VM elect-we
‘It is John that I want that we elect.’

b. * [FP Jánosti akarom [CP ti [AspP meg válasszuk ti ]]]
‘It is John I want we elect.’
compare:
c.

Azt
akarom, [CP (hogy) JÁNOST válasszuk meg]
that-ACC want-I
that John-ACC elect-we VM
‘I want that we elect John.’

The complementizer plays a crucial role in carrying the categorial, case, and
phi-features of the clausal argument, and sharing them via spec–head agreement
with the constituent raised to Spec,CP – presumably that is why it cannot be
deleted.
Den Dikken (1999b) proposes an alternative analysis of the case change attested in (69). He points out that 1st and 2nd person pronouns can also undergo case change, e.g. a te ‘you’ extracted from an object clause becomes téged
‘you-ACC’. The accusative forms of 1st and 2nd person pronouns, however, are
non-compositional (the regular accusative of te, for instance, would be té-t) – hence
they cannot be the output of syntactic morpheme composition. He concludes that
the accusative-marked subject is accusative from the start; it is generated as such
in Spec,VP. The constituent appearing in the morphosyntactic projections of the
embedded verb, bearing nominative case, is a pro. He argues that the 2nd person
8

For certain constraints on hogy deletion, see Kenesei (1994: 333–339).

258

The syntax of Hungarian

accusative pronoun is represented by a clitic-doubling-like possessive construction, consisting of a clitic and the te ‘you’ pronoun supplied with the 2nd person possessedness inflection. When it is subject to long operator movement, the
whole pronominal complex is raised from the embedded Spec,VP to Spec,CP, as
follows:
. . .[CP [CL2sg téged]i [hogy [IP pro [VP ti . . .
you-ACC that

(73)

Téged has a focus feature, which needs to be checked in the matrix Spec,FP. The
clitic part (an -l morpheme), on the other hand, moves to the matrix Spec,AgrOP,
and subsequently cliticizes to the -k subject agreement suffix, resulting in a -lak
morpheme complex (compare Section 3.5.2); that is:
(74)

[FP TÉGEDi akarlak [CP ti hogy pro ti meglátogasd
Jánost]]
you-ACC want-I
that
visit-SUBJ-DEF-2SG John-ACC
‘It is you that I want to visit John.’

10.5.4 A base-generated construction
Long topicalization apparently does not need to observe the constraints
that long focussing or long distributive quantifier movement are subject to. Thus:

(i)

It can violate the CED:

(75)

János már
dél felé
járt az idő, amikor felébredt.
John already noon towards went the time when awoke
‘John, it was already about noon when (he) woke up.’

(ii)

It can violate the CNPC:

(76) a.

Jánost
nincs [DP az az ember [DP aki fel tudná bosszantani]]
John-ACC isn’t
that the man
who VM could make.angry
‘John, there is no man who could make (him) angry.’

b.

Jánost [DP azt
a pletykát ti ] hallottam [CP hogy el fogják
John-ACC that-ACC the gossip-ACC heard-I
that VM will-they
bocsájtani]i
fire
‘John, I heard the gossip that they will fire.’

(iii)

The raised subject need not pick up the accusative assigned by the
matrix verb, as opposed to what we attested in (69):

(77)

János azt
hiszem, hogy elfogadja a javaslatot.
John that-ACC think-I that accepts the proposal
‘John, I think that (he) accepts the proposal.’

The subordinate clause

259

(iv)

The matrix verb does not agree with the raised object, or
subject-turned-object, e.g. in (78) it agrees with the definite object
clause instead of the indefinite object raised from it:

(78)

Ennyi vendéget nem gondolom,
hogy le tudunk ültetni.
so.many guest-ACC not think-DEF-1SG that VM can-we to.seat
‘So many guests, I don’t think that we can seat.’

(v)

The complementizer of the source clause can be omitted:

(79)

Jánossal azt
hiszem, nem érdemes vitatkozni.
John-with that-ACC think-I not worthwhile to.argue
‘With John, I think it is not worthwhile to argue.’

(vi)

The topic constituent can be followed by a coreferent pronoun
cliticized to it:

(80) a.

Jánost, azt nincs az az ember, aki fel tudná bosszantani.
John-ACC him isn’t that the man who angry could make
‘John, there is no man who could make him angry.’

b.

Jánossal, azzal azt
hiszem, nem érdemes vitatkozni.
John-with he-with it-ACC think-I not worthwhile to.argue
‘With John, I think it is not worthwhile to argue with him.’

The matrix topic in (75)–(80), coindexed with an empty complement position
in the subordinate clause, is in all probability base-generated as a hanging topic.
At the same time, a matrix topic belonging lexically to the subordinate clause can
also satisfy the stricter conditions of long operator movement: thus, it can pick up
the accusative assigned by the matrix verb – i.e., long topic movement is also an
option provided by Hungarian grammar; for example:
(81)

Jánost
nem mindenki szeretné, hogy elnök
legyen.
John-ACC not everybody would.like that president become
‘John, not everybody would like to be president.’

In a matrix sentence in which both the topic and the focus bind argument positions
in the subordinate clause, only the focus has passed through Spec,CP; the topic
must have been base-generated in the matrix clause; for example:
(82) a.

b.

János AZ ELNÖKSÉGREi szeretnénk, ha pályázna ti .
John the presidency-to would.like-we if aspired
‘We would like John to aspire TO THE PRESIDENCY.’
Az elnökségre JÁNOSTi szeretnénk, ha pályázna ti .
the presidency-to John-ACC would.like-we if aspired
‘To the presidency, we would like JOHN to aspire.’

In (82a) the oblique complement has been extracted through Spec,CP from the
embedded clause. The subject has been base generated in front of the complex

260

The syntax of Hungarian

sentence as a hanging topic – consequently it cannot assume the accusative case
licensed/assigned by the matrix verb:
(83)

* Jánost AZ ELNÖKSÉGRE szeretnénk, ha pályázna.
John-ACC the presidency-to would.like-we if aspired
‘We would like if John aspired to the presidency.’

In (82b), on the other hand, it is the oblique complement of the embedded verb
that is generated in front of the matrix clause as a hanging topic, and the subject
passes through Spec,CP, assuming accusative case on the way.

10.6

Parasitic gaps

In the Hungarian sentence, the topic, the distributive quantifiers, and the
focus, too, can license a parasitic gap,9 i.e., each of these elements can simultaneously bind two variables in two different clauses; for example:
(84) a.

Egy cikketi
elveszı́tett a szerkesztő ti , még mielőtt elolvasott-volna pgi .
an article-ACC lost
the editor
still before he.had.read
‘The editor lost an article still before reading.’

b.

A szerkesztő minden cikketi
elveszı́tett ti , még mielőtt
the editor
every paper-ACC lost
still before
elolvasott-volna pgi .
he.had.read
‘The editor lost every paper still before reading.’

c.

HÁNY
CIKKETi
dobott ki a szerkesztő ti anélkül, hogy
how.many paper-ACC threw out the editor
without.it that
elolvasott-volna pgi ?
he.had.read
‘How many papers did the editor throw out without reading?’

d. * A szerkesztő ki dobott cikkeketi , anélkül, hogy elolvasott-volna pgi .
the editor
out threw papers
without.it that he.had.read
‘The editor threw out papers without reading.’

The embedded clauses in (84) contain a parasitic variable rather than a pro because
a pro would count as a definite pronoun, a DP, and would trigger the objective verb
conjugation. The embedded verbs of these sentences, however, are in the subjective
conjugation, i.e., they agree with an indefinite object.
9

The first analysis of Hungarian parasitic gaps was put forth by É. Kiss (1985–86). Horvath
(1990, 1992) pointed out a problem with the theory, and proposed an alternative solution.
É. Kiss (2001) is a revised version of É. Kiss (1985–86), with the problem found by
Horvath eliminated.

The subordinate clause

261

The parasitic gap construction is legitimate if both variables are linked to
the antecedent by legitimate chains, which happen to merge at some point. The
requirement that each of the variables be linked to the operator by a series of legitimate chain links does not necessarily mean case identity between the antecedent
and the two variables. Compare the following examples. In (85a,b) the lack of case
identity between the antecedent and one of the variables leads to ungrammaticality;
however, (86), displaying apparently the same case-mismatch, is grammatical.
(85) a. * Több tanulmányra isi hivatkoztál ti , anélkül, hogy elolvastál-volna pgi .
several study-to
also referred-you without.it that you.had.read
‘You referred to several studies without reading.’
b. * MILYEN CIKKi jelent
meg ti , anélkül, hogy elolvastál-volna pgi ?
what
article appeared VM without.it that you.had.read
‘What article appeared without you reading?’
(86)

MILYEN TANULMÁNYTi akartál,
anélkül, hogy elolvastál-volna pgi ,
what
study-ACC
wanted-you without.it that you.had.read
hogy megjelenjen ti ?
that appear-SUBJ-3SG
‘What study did you want to appear without reading?’

The problem with (85a,b) is that the parasitic gap cannot be linked to the operator
binding the real gap by a legitimate chain. In both sentences, the parasitic gap is
in the accusative, whereas in (85a) the antecedent is in an oblique case, and in
(85b) it is in the nominative. In (86) the antecedent (as well as the parasitic gap)
is in the accusative, whereas the real gap is in the nominative. Nevertheless, the
nominative variable is linked to the antecedent by a legitimate chain: the nominative
is superseded by an accusative assigned to the Spec,CP of the clause in which the
nominative argument was generated. Consider also the example in (87):
(87)

* MELYIK CIKKETi dobta
ki a szerkesztő ti , mielőtt
which paper-ACC threw-DEF-3SG out the editor
before
elolvasott-volna pgi ?
read-PAST-INDEF.3SG
‘Which paper did the editor throw out before reading?’

Example (87) is ungrammatical because the chain linking the parasitic gap to
the operator is illegitimate: the parasitic variable has the feature [–definite] (as
is indicated by the subjective conjugation of the verb), whereas the operator is
[+definite]. The fact that the parasitic gap must share all the grammatical features of
the operator binding the real gap is theoretically important because it provides
evidence that the parasitic gap construction constitutes a forking chain. No other
construction can ensure a match of features between the antecedent and the parasitic
gap. In Chomsky (1986), for example, the parasitic gap is bound by a null operator,

262

The syntax of Hungarian

which is linked to the operator binding the real gap through strong binding. A
binding relation, however, does not require that the binder and the bound element
share all grammatical features (e.g. in the sentence A man shot himself the binder
is [–definite], and the bound element is [+definite]).
Hungarian parasitic gap constructions have the locality properties known from
other languages: the parasitic branch of the forking chain is located in an adjunct,
i.e., the highest parasitic variable is separated from the nearest licensing variable
by an extra barrier. Observe the structure of the parasitic gap construction in (86):
(88)

FP

Spec

F'

milyen tanulmányti
F

VP

akartálk
CP

V NumP PP
tk pro

C'

Spec

P'

Spec

t'i

pg"i
P

C

DP

AspP

hogy

nélkül
DP

megjelenjen ti

CP

a(z)
Spec

C'

pg'i
AspP

C
hogy

elolvastál volna pgi

10.7

Summary

A clause can be embedded in a matrix sentence by means of a subordinating operator: the unmarked hogy ‘that’, a relative pronoun or pro-adverb,
or an adverbial complementizer. Subordinate clauses functioning as arguments

The subordinate clause

263

are associated with a pronominal or lexical head. The head associated with the
subordinate clause plays a dual role: it picks up the case assigned by the matrix verb to the argument represented by the embedded clause, and, on the other
hand, it represents the embedded clause in the matrix operator positions that are
not available for clausal complements. So as to be able to function as a focus
or a distributive phrase in the matrix sentence, even an adjunct clause may require a pronominal/pro-adverbial head to represent it in the matrix Spec,FP or
Spec,DistP position. A that-clause cannot be internal to a lexical projection, and is
also barred from Spec,AspP, Spec,DistP, and Spec,FP by independent constraints.
As a consequence of these restrictions, it usually surfaces either in topic position,
or extraposed to the right periphery of the matrix sentence.
Embedded questions have the unmarked hogy ‘that’ complementizer in their
C position. The wh-phrase occupies the Spec,FP slot of the embedded clause,
hence a wh-clause is not an island for extraction. The interrogative operator of an
embedded question can assume matrix scope if the embedded question is associated
with an interrogative pronoun in the matrix sentence. Alternatively, the embedded
interrogative phrase can undergo long focus movement.
Complex sentences whose matrix verb is a bridge verb (a modal, a verb of saying,
or a verb expressing a mental activity) can form a single domain for operator
movement. A condition of long operator movement is that the pronoun associated
with the subordinate clause should be a phonologically vacuous pro. Long operator
movement carrying material from the embedded clause into a preverbal position
of the matrix sentence may involve case reassignment to the extracted constituent
by the matrix verb. Complementizer deletion blocks long operator movement.
There is also a base-generated construction resembling the output of long topic
movement, but exempt from its constraints.
The focus, the distributive quantifier, and the topic all license parasitic gaps,
i.e., they can bind two variables in two different clauses simultaneously. Each of
the variables must be linked to the operator by a legitimate chain, in which the
grammatical features of the variable are properly transmitted to the antecedent.

References
Abraham, Werner and Sjaak de Meij (eds.) 1986, Topic, Focus, and Configurationality,
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Ackerman, Farrel 1984, ‘Verbal modifiers as argument taking predicates: complex verbs
as predicate complexes in Hungarian’, Groninger Arbeiten zur Germanistischen
Linguistik 25: 23–71.
Ackerman, Farrel 1987, ‘Pronominal incorporation: the case of prefixal adverbs’, in Kenesei
(ed.) 1987, pp. 213–260.
Ackerman, Farrel and Gert Webelhuth 1997, ‘The composition of (dis)continuous predicates: lexical or syntactic?’, Acta Linguistica Hungarica 44, 317–340.
Alberti, Gábor 1995, ‘Role assignment in Hungarian possessive constructions’, in Kenesei
(ed.) 1995, pp. 11–28.
Alberti, Gábor 1997a, Argument Selection, Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.
Alberti, Gábor 1997b, ‘Restrictions on the degree of referentiality of arguments in Hungarian
sentences’, Acta Linguistica Hungarica 44: 341–362.
Alberti, Gábor 1998, ‘On passivization in Hungarian’, in de Groot and Kenesei (eds.) 1998,
pp. 103–122.
Alberti, Gábor 1999, ‘Climbing for aspect’, paper presented at the Workshop on verb clusters
Dutch–Hungarian Study Center, Öttevény, Oct. 1999.
Alberti, Gábor and István Kenesei (eds.) 2000, Approaches to Hungarian 7, Szeged: JATE.
Alberti, Gábor and Anna Medve 2000, ‘Focus constructions and the “scope-inversion puzzle” in Hungarian’, in Alberti and Kenesei (eds.) 2000, pp. 93–118.
Alexiadou, Artemis and Elena Anagnostopoulou 1998, ‘Parametrizing AGR: word order, V-movement and EPP-checking’, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 16:
491–539.
Baker, Mark 1985, ‘The mirror principle and morphosyntactic explanation’, Linguistic
Inquiry 16: 373–415.
Bánréti, Zoltán 1994, ‘Coordination’, in Kiefer and É. Kiss (eds.) 1994, pp. 355–414.
Bartos, Huba 1997, ‘On “subjective” and “objective” agreement in Hungarian’, Acta
Linguistica Hungarica 44: 363–384.
Bartos, Huba 1999a, Morfoszintaxis és interpretáció: a magyar inflexiós jelenségek szintaktikai háttere, Ph.D. dissertation, Budapest: ELTE.
Bartos, Huba 1999b. ‘Verbal complexes and morpho-syntactic merger’, paper presented
at the Workshop on verb clusters Dutch–Hungarian Study Center, Öttevény, Oct.
1999.
Bartos, Huba 2000a, ‘Az alanyi és a tárgyas ragozásról’, in Büky and Maleczki (eds.) 2000,
pp. 153–170.

265

266

References

Bartos, Huba 2000b, ‘Topics, quantifiers, subjects: the preverbal field in Chinese and
Hungarian’, paper presented at the International Symposium on Topic and Focus
in Chinese, June 21–22, 2000, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, to appear in
Sze-Wing Tang and Dingxu Shi (eds.), Topic and Focus in Chinese.
Bartos, Huba 2000c, ‘Affix order in Hungarian and the Mirror Principle’, in Alberti and
Kenesei (eds.) 2000, 53–70.
Bartos, Huba 2001, ‘Mutatónévmási módosı́tók a magyar főnévi szerkezetekben: egyezés
vagy osztozás?’, in Marianne Bakró-Nagy, Zoltán Bánréti and Katalin É. Kiss
(eds.), Újabb eredmények a strukturális magyar nyelvtan és a nyelvtörténet köréből,
Budapest: Osiris.
Beghelli, Filippo and Tim Stowell 1997, ‘Distributivity and negation: the syntax of each
and every’, in Szabolcsi (ed.) 1997b, pp. 71–108.
Bittner, Maria and Ken Hale 1996, ‘The structural determination of case and agreement’,
Linguistic Inquiry 27: 1–68.
Borer, Hagit 1989, ‘Anaphoric Agr’, in Osvaldo Jaeggli and Ken J. Safir (eds.), The null
subject parameter, Dordrecht: Kluwer, pp. 69–109.
Brassai, Sámuel 1860, 1863–65, ‘A magyar mondat’, Magyar Akadémiai Értesı́tő. A Nyelvés Széptudományi Osztály Közlönye 1: 279–399; 3: 3–128, 173–409.
Bresnan, Joan 1982, ‘Control and complementation’, Linguistic Inquiry 13: 343–434.
Bródy, Michael 1990a, ‘Remarks on the order of elements in the Hungarian focus field’, in
Kenesei (ed.) 1990, pp. 95–122.
Bródy, Michael 1990b, ‘Some remarks on the focus field in Hungarian’, University College
London Working Papers in Linguistics 2, 201–225.
Bródy, Michael 1995, ‘Focus and checking theory’, in Kenesei (ed.) 1995, pp. 29–44.
Bródy, Michael 1999, ‘Word order, restructuring and mirror theory’, ms., University College
London / Linguistic Institute of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences.
Bródy, Michael 2000, ‘Mirror theory: Syntactic representation in perfect syntax’, Linguistic
Inquiry 31: 29–56.
Bródy, Michael and Anna Szabolcsi 2000, ‘Overt scope: a case study in Hungarian’, ms.,
University College London / New York University.
Büky, László and Márta Maleczki (eds.) 1995, A mai magyar nyelv leı́rásának újabb
módszerei II, Szeged: JATE.
Büky, László and Márta Maleczki (eds.) 1998, A mai magyar nyelv leı́rásának újabb
módszerei III, Szeged: JATE.
Büky, László and Márta Maleczki (eds.) 2000, A mai magyar nyelv leı́rásának újabb
módszerei IV, Szeged: JATE.
Cardinaletti, Anna and Michal Starke 1999, ‘The typology of structural deficiency: a case
study of three classes of pronouns’, in Henk van Riemsdijk (ed.), Clitics in the
Languages of Europe, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 145–233.
Chomsky, Noam 1976, ‘Conditions on rules of grammar’, Linguistic Analysis 2: 303–349.
Chomsky, Noam 1981, Lectures on Government and Binding, Dordrecht: Reidel.
Chomsky, Noam 1986, Knowledge of Language, New York: Praeger.
Chomsky, Noam 1995, The Minimalist Program, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chomsky, Noam and Morris Halle 1968, The Sound Pattern of English, New York: Harper
and Row.
Cinque, Guglielmo 1997, Adverbs and Functional Heads: A Crosslinguistic Perspective,
New York/Oxford: Oxford University Press.

References

267

Comorovski, Ileana 1996, Interrogative Phrases and the Syntax–Semantics Interface,
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Csirmaz, Anikó and Balázs Surányi 1998, ‘Are there expletives in Hungarian?’, paper presented at the First Conference on Linguistic Theory in Eastern European Languages,
April 19–21, Szeged University.
Dalmi, Gréte 1995, Hungarian Infinitival Constructions, Master of philosophy Thesis,
University of Sydney.
Diesing, M. 1992, ‘Bare plural subjects and the derivation of logical representations’, Linguistic Inquiry 23: 353–380.
Dikken, Marcel den 1995, Particles: On the Syntax of Verb–Particle, Triadic, and Causative
Constructions, New York/Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dikken, Marcel den 1999a, ‘On the structural representation of possession and agreement:
the case of (anti-)agreement in Hungarian possessed nominal phrases’, in Kenesei
(ed.) 1999, pp. 137–178.
Dikken, Marcel den 1999b, ‘Agreement and clause union’, ms., City University of New York.
Dikken, Marcel den 2000, ‘A tárgyi személyes névmások szerkezete és az egyeztetés’, in
Büky and Maleczki (eds.) 2000, pp. 171–180.
Dikken, Marcel den and Anastasia Giannakidou 2000, ‘What the hell?’, to appear in
NELS 31.
Dimitrova-Vulchanova, Mila 1998, ‘Fragments of Balkan Nominal Structure’, in Artemis
Alexiadou and Chris Wilder (eds.), Possessors, Predicates and Movement in the
Determiner Phrase, Amsterdam: John Benjamins, pp. 333–360.
Dobrovie-Sorin, Carmen 1993, Romanian Syntax, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
É. Kiss, Katalin 1977, ‘Topic and focus in Hungarian syntax’, Montreal Working Papers in
Linguistics 8, 1–42.
É. Kiss, Katalin 1981, ‘Syntactic relations in Hungarian, a ‘free’ word order language’,
Linguistic Inquiry 12: 185–215.
É. Kiss, Katalin 1985–1986, ‘Parasitic chains’, The Linguistic Review 5: 41–74.
É. Kiss, Katalin 1987a, Configurationality in Hungarian, Dordrecht: Reidel.
É. Kiss, Katalin 1987b, ‘Is the VP universal?’ in Kenesei (ed.) 1987, pp. 13–87.
É. Kiss, Katalin 1988, ‘Még egyszer a magyar mondat intonációjáról és hangsúlyozásáról’,
Nyelvtudományi Közlemények 89: 1–52.
É. Kiss, Katalin 1990, ‘Why noun–complement clauses are barriers’, in Joan Mascaro
and Marina Nespor (eds.), A Festschrift for Henk van Riemsdijk, Dordrecht: Foris,
pp. 265–277.
É. Kiss, Katalin 1991a, ‘Logical structure in syntactic structure: the case of Hungarian’,
in James Huang and Robert May (eds.), Logical Structure and Syntactic Structure,
Dordrecht: Reidel, pp. 111–148.
É. Kiss, Katalin 1991b, ‘On the locality condition of anaphora and pronominal variable binding’, in Jan Koster and Eric Reuland (eds.), Long Distance Anaphora, Cambridge
University Press, pp. 245–261.
É. Kiss, Katalin 1991c, ‘An argument for movement’, in K. Netter and H. Haider (eds.),
Representation versus Derivation, Dordrecht: Reidel, pp. 199–217.
É. Kiss, Katalin 1992, ‘Az egyszerű mondat szerkezete’, in Kiefer (ed.) 1992b,
pp. 79–178.
É. Kiss, Katalin 1993, ‘Wh-movement and specificity’, Natural Language and Linguistic
Theory 11: 85–120.

268

References

É. Kiss, Katalin 1994a, ‘Sentence structure and word order’, in Kiefer and É. Kiss (eds.)
1994, pp. 1–90.
É. Kiss, Katalin 1994b, ‘Scrambling as the base generation of random complement order’,
in Norbert Corver and Henk van Riemsdijk (eds.), Studies on Scrambling. Movement
and Non-movement Approaches to Free-word-order Phenomena, Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter, pp. 221–256.
É. Kiss, Katalin 1995a, ‘Multiple topic, one focus?’, GLOW Newsletter 34: 73.
É. Kiss, Katalin 1995b, ‘Többszörös fókusz a magyar mondatszerkezetben’, in Büky and
Maleczki (eds.) 1995, pp. 47–66.
É. Kiss, Katalin 1995c, ‘The definiteness effect revisited’, in Kenesei (ed.) 1995, pp. 63–88.
É. Kiss, Katalin 1996, ‘Two subject positions in English’, The Linguistic Review 13:
119–142.
É. Kiss, Katalin 1998a, ‘Multiple topic, one focus?’ Acta Linguistica Hungarica 45: 3–30.
É. Kiss, Katalin 1998b, ‘Identificational focus versus information focus’, Language 74:
245–273.
É. Kiss, Katalin 1998c, ‘Discourse-configurationality in the languages of Europe’, in Anna
Siewierska (ed.), Constituent Order in the Languages of Europe, Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter, pp. 681–729.
É. Kiss, Katalin 1998d, ‘Mondattan’, in K. É. Kiss, Ferenc Kiefer, and Péter Siptár, Új
magyar nyelvtan, Budapest: Osiris, pp. 15–185.
É. Kiss, Katalin 1999a, ‘Verbal prefixes or postpositions? Postpositional aspectualizers in
Hungarian’, in de Groot and Kenesei (eds.), pp. 123–148.
É. Kiss, Katalin 1999b, ‘Strategies of complex predicate formation and the Hungarian
Verbal Complex’, in Kenesei (ed.) 1999, pp. 115–136.
É. Kiss, Katalin 2000a, ‘The Hungarian noun phrase is like the English noun phrase’, in
Alberti and Kenesei (eds.) 2000, pp. 119–150.
É. Kiss, Katalin 2000b, ‘A [+referáló] és [+specifikus] jegyek ellenőrzése a kontrasztı́v
topik esetében’, in Büky and Maleczki (eds.) 2000, pp. 85–97.
É. Kiss, Katalin 2001, ‘Parasitic chains revisited’, in Peter W. Culicover and Paul M. Postal
(eds.), Parasitic Gaps, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 99–123.
É. Kiss, Katalin to appear, ‘The EPP in a topic-prominent language’, in Peter Svenonius
(ed.), Subjects, Topics, and the EPP, Oxford-New York: Oxford University Press.
É. Kiss, Katalin and Ferenc Kiefer (eds.) 1994, The Syntactic Structure of Hungarian:
Syntax and Semantics 27, San Diego / New York: Academic Press.
É. Kiss, Katalin, Ferenc Kiefer, and Péter Siptár 1998, Új Magyar Nyelvtan, Budapest: Osiris.
Emonds, Joseph 1978, A Transformational Approach to English Syntax, New York:
Academic Press.
Enç, Mürvet 1991, ‘The semantics of specificity’, Linguistic Inquiry 22: 21–25.
Farkas, Donka 1986, ‘The syntactic position of focus in Hungarian’, Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory 4: 77–96.
Farkas, Donka 1987, ‘Direct object pro in Hungarian’, in Kenesei (ed.) 1987, pp. 191–211.
Farkas, Donka 1990, ‘Two cases of underspecification in morphology’, Linguistic Inquiry
21: 539–550.
Giannakidou, Anastasia 2000, ‘Negative . . . concord?’ Natural Language and Linguistic
Theory 18: 457–523.
Giannakidou, Anastasia and J. Quer 1995, ‘Two mechanisms for the licensing of indefinites’,
in L. Gabriele et al. (eds.), Papers from the 6th Annual Meeting of the Formal
Linguistics Society of Midamerica, Bloomington, IN: IULC Publications.

References

269

Greenberg, Joseph H. 1966, ‘Some universals of grammar with particular reference to the
order of meaningful elements’, in Joseph Greenberg (ed.), Universals of Language,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 73–113.
Grimshaw, Jane 1990, Argument Structure, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Grimshaw, Jane 1991, ‘Extended projection’, ms., Brandeis University.
Groot, Casper de 1981, ‘Sentence intertwining in Hungarian’, in M. A. Bolkenstein et al.
(eds.), Predication and Expression in Functional Grammar, New York: Academic
Press, 41–64.
Groot, Casper de and István Kenesei (eds.) 1998, Approaches to Hungarian 5, Szeged: JATE.
Gyuris, Beáta 1999, ‘The interpretation of adverbial quantifiers in contrastive topic in
Hungarian’, in Matako Hirotani and Andries Coetze (eds.), Proceedings of NELS
30, Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts, pp. 259–274.
Gyuris, Beáta 2000, ‘Contrastive topics crosslinguistically’, paper presented at the 2nd
International Conference in Contrastive Semantics and Pragmatics, Sept. 11–13,
Cambridge.
Haader, Lea 1998, ‘A mondatátszövődés a nyelvhasználat szemszögéből’, Magyar Nyelvőr
122: 318–324.
Haegeman, Liliane 1995, The Syntax of Negation, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Haegeman, Liliane and R. Zanuttini 1991, ‘Negative heads and the Neg Criterion’, The
Linguistic Review 8: 233–251.
Hallman, Peter 1998, ‘Reiterative syntax’, in J. Black and V. Motapayane (eds.), Clitics,
Pronouns, and Movements. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 87–131.
Herburger, Elena 1997, ‘Focus and weak noun phrases’, Natural Language Semantics 5:
53–78.
Horvath, Julia 1986a, Focus in the Theory of Grammar and the Syntax of Hungarian,
Dordrecht: Foris.
Horvath, Julia 1986b, ‘Remarks on the configurationality issue’, in Abraham and de Meij
(eds.) 1986, pp. 65–87.
Horvath, Julia 1987, ‘On models with a VP-less phrase structure’, in Kenesei (ed.) 1987,
pp. 133–165.
Horvath, Julia 1990, ‘Parasitic gap constructions: an adjunct/argument asymmetry’, in
Kenesei (ed.) 1990, pp. 65–94.
Horvath, Julia 1992, ‘Anti-c-command and case-compatibility in the licensing of parasitic
chains’, The Linguistic Review 9, 183–218.
Horvath, Julia 1995, ‘Partial wh-movement and wh-scope-markers’, in Kenesei (ed.) 1995,
pp. 89–124.
Horvath, Julia 1997, ‘The status of “Wh-expletives” and the partial Wh-movement construction in Hungarian’, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 15: 509–572.
Horvath, Julia 1998, ‘Wh-phrases and the wh-scope-marker strategy in Hungarian interrogatives’, Acta Linguistica Hungarica 45: 31–60.
Hunyadi, László 1986, ‘The expression of logical scope in Hungarian: on its syntax and
semantics’, in Abraham and de Meij (eds.) 1986, pp. 89–102.
Hunyadi, László 1997, Hungarian Sentence Prosody and Universal Grammar: Studies in
Applied Linguistics 3, Debrecen: Kossuth Lajos University.
Hunyadi, László 1999, ‘The outlines of a metrical syntax of Hungarian’, Acta Linguistica
Hungarica 46, 69–94.
Jacobs, Joachim 1986, ‘The syntax of focus and adverbials in German’, in Abraham and de
Meij (eds.) 1986, pp. 103–127.

270

References

Jakab, Edit 1998, talk presented at the Fourth International Conference on the Structure of
Hungarian, Pécs: Janus Pannonius University.
Kálmán, C. György et al. 1989, A magyar segédigék rendszere. Általános Nyelvészeti
Tanulmányok 17: 49–103.
Kálmán, László et al. 1986, ‘Hocus, focus, and verb types in Hungarian infinitive constructions’, in Abraham and de Meij (eds.) 1986, pp. 129–142.
Kálmán, László 1990, ‘Deferred information: the semantics of commitment’, in László
Kálmán and László Pólos (eds.), Papers from the Second Symposium on Logic and
Language, Budapest: Akadémiai Kiadó, pp. 125–157.
Kálmán, László 1995, ‘Definiteness effect verbs in Hungarian’, in Kenesei (ed.) 1995,
pp. 221–242.
Kayne, Richard 1994, The Antisymmetry of Syntax, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kenesei, István (ed.) 1985, Approaches to Hungarian 1, Szeged: JATE.
Kenesei, István 1986, ‘On the logic of Hungarian word order’, in Abraham and de Meij
(eds.) 1986, pp. 143–159.
Kenesei, István (ed.) 1987, Approaches to Hungarian 2, Szeged: JATE.
Kenesei, István 1989, ‘On the interaction of lexical structure and logical form in pronominal binding’, in László Marácz and Pietr Muysken (eds.), Configurationality:
The Typology of Asymmetries, Dordrecht: Reidel.
Kenesei, István (ed.) 1990, Approaches to Hungarian 3, Szeged: JATE.
Kenesei, István 1992, ‘Az alárendelt mondatok szerkezete’, in Kiefer (ed.) 1992b,
pp. 529–714.
Kenesei, István 1994, ‘Subordinate clauses’, in Kiefer and É. Kiss (eds.) 1994, pp. 275–354.
Kenesei, István (ed.) 1995, Approaches to Hungarian 5, Szeged: JATE.
Kenesei, István 1998, ‘Adjuncts and arguments in VP-focus in Hungarian’, Acta Linguistica
Hungarica 45: 61–88.
Kenesei, István (ed.) 1999, Crossing Boundaries, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Kenesei, István 2000, ‘Van-e segédige a magyarban?’, in Kenesei (ed.), Igei vonzatstruktúrák a magyarban, Budapest: Osiris, pp. 157–196.
Kenesei, István and Csaba Pléh (eds.) 1992, Approaches to Hungarian 4, Szeged: JATE.
Khalaily, Shamir 1995, ‘QR and the minimalist theory of syntax: the case of universally and
negative quantified expressions in Palestinian Arabic’, ms., University of Leiden.
Kiefer, Ferenc 1967, On Emphasis and Word Order in Hungarian, Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press.
Kiefer, Ferenc 1992a, ‘Az aspektus és a mondat szerkezete’, in Kiefer (ed.) 1992b,
pp. 797–886.
Kiefer, Ferenc (ed.) 1992b, Strukturális magyar nyelvtan 1. Mondattan, Budapest:
Akadémiai Kiadó.
Kiefer, Ferenc 1994a, ‘Aspect and syntactic structure’, in Kiefer and É. Kiss (eds.) 1994,
pp. 415–464.
Kiefer, Ferenc 1994b, ‘Some peculiarities in the aspectual system of Hungarian’, in
C. Bache, H. BasbØll, and C. E. Lindberg (eds.), Tense–Aspect–Aspectuality, Berlin:
de Gruyter.
Kiefer, Ferenc (ed.) 2000, Strukturális magyar nyelvtan 3: Morfológia, Budapest:
Akadémiai Kiadó.
Kiefer, Ferenc and Katalin É. Kiss (eds.) 1994, The Syntactic Structure of Hungarian:
Syntax and Semantics 27. San Diego / New York: Academic Press.

References

271

Kinyalolo, Kasangati 1990, Syntactic Dependencies and the Spec–Head Agreement
Hypothesis in KiLega, Ph.D. dissertation, UCLA.
Komlósy, András 1985, ‘Predicate complementation’, in Kenesei (ed.) 1985, pp. 53–75.
Komlósy, András 1992, ‘Régensek és vonzatok’, in Kiefer (ed.) 1992b, pp. 299–529.
Komlósy, András 1994, ‘Complements and adjuncts’, in É. Kiss and Kiefer (eds.) 1994,
pp. 91–178.
Koopman, Hilda and Anna Szabolcsi 2000, Verbal Complexes, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Kratzer, Angelika 1995, ‘Stage-level and individual-level predicates’, in G. N. Carlson and
F. J. Pelletier (eds.), The Generic Book, Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago
Press, pp. 125–175.
Krifka, Manfred 1992, ‘A framework for focus-sensitive quantification’, in Ch. Barker and
David Dowty (eds.), SALT II. Proceedings from the Second Conference on Semantics
and Linguistic Theory, Working Papers in Linguistics 40, Columbus, OH: Ohio State
University, pp. 215–236.
Kuno, Susumu 1973, Japanese Grammar, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Laczkó, Tibor 1985, ‘Deverbal nominals and their complements in noun phrases’, in Kenesei
(ed.), pp. 93–119.
Laczkó, Tibor 1990, ‘On arguments and adjuncts of derived nominals: a lexical-functional
approach’, in Kenesei (ed.) 1990, pp. 123–147.
Laczkó, Tibor 1995a, The Syntax of Hungarian Noun Phrases: MetaLinguistica 2, Frankfurt
am Main: Peter Lang.
Laczkó, Tibor 1995b, ‘On the status of való in adjectivalized constituents in noun phrases’,
in Kenesei (ed.) 1995, pp. 125–152.
Ladusaw, William 1992. ‘Expressing negation’, in Ch. Barker and D. Dowty (eds.), SALT II.
Proceedings from the Second Conference on Semantics and Linguistic Theory,
Working Papers in Linguistics 40, Columbus, OH: Ohio State University, pp. 237–
259.
Ladusaw, William 1994. ‘Thetic and categorical, stage and individual, weak and strong’, in
M. Harvey and L. Santelman (eds.), SALT 4, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
pp. 220–229.
Lipták, Anikó 1998, ‘A magyar fókuszemelések egy minimalista elemzése’, in Büky and
Maleczki (eds.) 1998, pp. 93–116.
Lipták, Anikó 2000, ‘On the difference between focus movement and wh-movement’,
GLOW Newsletter 44: 78–79.
Maleczki, Márta 1992, ‘Bare common nouns and their relation to the temporal constitution
of events in Hungarian’, in Paul Dekker and Martin Stokhof (eds.), Proceedings of
the Eighth Amsterdam Colloquium, Institute for Logic, Language, and Computation,
Amsterdam University, pp. 347–365.
Maleczki, Márta 1995, ‘On the definiteness effect in Hungarian’, in Kenesei (ed.) 1995,
pp. 263–284.
Maleczki, Márta 1999, ‘Weak subjects in fixed space’, Acta Linguistica Hungarica 46:
95–118.
Marácz, László 1986a, ‘Dressed or naked: the case of the PP in Hungarian’, in Abraham
and de Meij (eds.) 1986, pp. 227–252.
Marácz, László 1986b, ‘On coreferential and bound variable interpretation in nonconfigurational languages’, Theoretical Linguistic Research 2: 85–172.

272

References

Marácz, László 1988, ‘Locality and correspondence effects in Hungarian’, in A.
Cardinaletti, G. Cinque, and G. Giusti (eds.), Annali di Ca’ Foscari, Constituent
Structure. Papers from the 1987 GLOW Conference, Venezia, pp. 203–237.
Marácz, László 1989, Asymmetries in Hungarian, Ph.D. dissertation, University of
Groningen.
May, Robert 1985, Logical Form, Its Structure and Derivation, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Molnár, Valéria 1998, ‘Topic in focus: the syntax, phonology, semantics, and pragmatics
of the so-called “contrastive topic” in Hungarian and German’, Acta Linguistica
Hungarica 45: 89–166.
Olsvay, Csaba 1999, ‘The Hungarian verbal complex: an alternative approach’, paper presented at the workshop on verb clusters Dutch–Hungarian Study Center, Öttevény,
Oct. 1999.
Olsvay, Csaba 2000a, ‘Formális jegyek egyeztetése a magyar nemsemleges mondatokban’,
in Büky and Maleczki (eds.) 2000, pp. 119–152.
Olsvay, Csaba 2000b, Negative Quantifiers in the Hungarian Sentence, MA Thesis, Eötvös
Loránd University, Budapest.
Payne, John and Erika Chisarik 2000, ‘Demonstrative constructions in Hungarian’, in
Alberti and Kenesei (eds.) 2000, pp. 179–198.
Pesetsky, David 1987, ‘Wh-in-situ: movement and unselective binding’, in Eric Reuland
and Alice ter Meulen (eds.), The Representation of (In)definiteness, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, pp. 98–129.
Piñon, Christopher 1992, ‘Heads in the focus field’, in Kenesei and Pléh (eds.) 1992,
pp. 99–122.
Piñon, Christopher 1995, ‘Around the progressive in Hungarian’, in Kenesei (ed.) 1995,
pp. 153–191.
Puskás, Genovéva 1998, ‘On the Neg Criterion in Hungarian’, Acta Linguistica Hungarica
45: 167–213.
Puskás, Genovéva 2000, Word Order in Hungarian: The Syntax of A Positions, Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Rebrus, Péter 2000, ‘Morfofonológiai jelenségek a magyarban’, in Kiefer (ed.) 2000,
pp. 763–949.
Reinhart, Tanya 1983, Anaphora and Semantic Interpretation, London: Croom Helm.
Riemsdijk, Henk van 1998, ‘Categorial feature magnetism: the endocentricity and distribution of projections’, Journal of Comparative Germanic Linguistics 2: 1–18.
Rouveret, Alain 1991, ‘Functional categories and agreement’, The Linguistic Review 8,
353–387.
Stechow, Arnim von and Susanne Uhmann 1986, ‘Some remarks on focus projection’, in
Abraham and de Meij (eds.) 1986, pp. 295–320.
Stowell, Timothy 1981, Origins of Phrase Structure, Ph.D. dissertation, Cambridge, MA:
MIT.
Surányi, Balázs 2000, ‘Operator and head movement in Hungarian: from checking to
marking’, DOXIMP 4, Research Institute for Linguistics, Hungarian Academy of
Sciences, Working Papers in the Theory of Grammar 7, 1: 35–45.
Szabolcsi, Anna 1980, ‘Az aktuális mondattagolás szemantikájához’, Nyelvtudományi
Közlemények 82: 59–82.
Szabolcsi, Anna 1981a, ‘The semantics of topic-focus articulation’, in Jan Groenendijk
et al. (eds.), Formal Methods in the Study of Language, Amsterdam: Matematisch
Centrum.

References

273

Szabolcsi, Anna 1981b, ‘The possessive construction in Hungarian: a configurational category in a non-configurational language’, Acta Linguistica Academiae Scientiarum
Hungaricae 31, 261–289.
Szabolcsi, Anna 1981c, ‘Compositionality in focus’, Folia Linguistica 15: 141–162.
Szabolcsi, Anna 1983a, ‘Focussing properties, or the trap of first order’, Theoretical Linguistics 10:125–145.
Szabolcsi, Anna 1983b, ‘The possessor that ran away from home’, The Linguistic Review
3: 89–102.
Szabolcsi, Anna 1986, ‘From definiteness effect to lexical integrity’, in Abraham and de
Meij (eds.) 1986, pp. 321–348.
Szabolcsi, Anna 1992a, A birtokos szerkezet és az egzisztenciális mondat, Budapest:
Akadémiai Kiadó.
Szabolcsi, Anna 1992b, ‘Subject suppression or lexical PRO? The case of derived nominals
in Hungarian’, Lingua 86, 149–176.
Szabolcsi, Anna 1994a, ‘The noun phrase’, in Kiefer and É. Kiss (eds.) 1994, pp. 179–274.
Szabolcsi, Anna 1994b, ‘All quantifiers are not equal: the case of focus’, Acta Linguistica
Hungarica 42: 171–187.
Szabolcsi, Anna 1997a, ‘Strategies for scope taking’, in Szabolcsi (ed.) 1997b, pp. 109–154.
Szabolcsi, Anna (ed.) 1997b, Ways of Scope Taking, Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Szabolcsi, Anna and Tibor Laczkó 1992, ‘A főnévi csoport szerkezete’, in Kiefer (ed.),
pp. 179–298.
Szendrői, Kriszta 1999, ‘Stress driven Focus Movement and stress avoiding verbs’, paper presented at the Workshop on verb clusters Dutch–Hungarian Study Center,
Öttevény, Oct. 1999.
Tóth, Ildikó 1999, ‘Negative polarity item licensing in Hungarian’, Acta Linguistica
Hungarica 46: 119–142.
Tóth, Ildikó 2000a, Inflected infinitives in Hungarian, Ph.D. dissertation, Tilburg University.
Tóth, Ildikó 2000b, ‘-va and -ván participles in Hungarian’, in Alberti and Kenesei (eds.)
2000, pp. 237–258.
Varga, László 1999, ‘Rhythmical variation in Hungarian’, Phonology 15, 227–266.
Vogel, Irene and István Kenesei 1987, ‘The interface between phonology and other components of grammar’, Phonology 4: 243–263.
Williams, Edwin 1987, ‘Implicit arguments, the binding theory, and control’, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 5: 151–180.
Zanuttini, Raffaela 1997, Negation and Clausal Structure, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Zolnay, Gyula 1926, ‘Mondatátszövődés’, Értekezések a Magyar Tudományos Akadémia
Nyelv- és Széptudományi Osztálya Köréből 23.

Index
Accusative Case
Accusative with infinitive verbs, 201
Ackerman, F., 189 fn. 4
Adjectival predicates, 71–74
Adverbials
sentence, 20–22, 129
predicate, 21, 126–129
Adverbs
of degree, 85–86, 126–128
of frequency, 85–86, 126–128
of manner, 85–86, 126–128, 203
negative, 89–91
Agreement, 6
infinitive–subject, 219
possession–possessor, 158–159, 167–168,
170–172
postposition–complement, 181, 186–187, 189
verb–object, 43, 49–55, 155, 203–205, 256
verb–subject, 43, 49, 55
akár- ‘any-’, 145, 147–148
Alberti, G., 23, 30, 226–227
Anaphora, 35–40
Anti-agreement, 170–172, 186–187, 220
Antisymmetry, 43
Article, 154 fn. 3
indefinite, 153
definite, 154, 158, 161, 170
Aspect, 62–67
experiential, 63, 66
neutralization of, 64, 132–133
perfective, 62–63
progressive, 63–66
Auxiliaries, 205
see also semi-auxiliaries
Auxiliary constraint, 206–207, 211, 225
bár- ‘any-’, 145, 147–148
Bartos, H., 43–53, 152, 159, 167, 170–172,
203, 209

Beghelli, F., 111, 117
Binding
Condition A, 35–40
Condition C, 5, 33–35
primacy condition of, 39
Brassai, S., 4, 6
Bridge verbs, 253
Bródy, M., 41, 84, 89, 122, 131, 209
Case
change, 255, 258, 261
constraint, 174, 177
reassignment, 255, 258, 261
Case Phrase (KP), 152, 184–186, 188
Cases, 6
Chomsky, N., 15, 255
Cinque, G., 21
Complementizer deletion, 257
Complex Noun Phrase Constraint, 241, 253
Condition on Extraction Domains, 252
Control, 200, 224–225
verbs, 199–200
Copula, 71–74
Counting quantifiers (existential quantifiers,
negative), 106, 115, 117
csak ‘only’, 89–91, 93–97
Dalmi, G., 216
Dative subject, 210, 214–221
D(iscourse)-linking, 102
Definiteness effect, 15–17, 144–145, 155–156,
171–173
Demonstratives (e, eme, ezen, ama, azon), 153
Demonstratives (ez, az), 163–164, 169–170,
182–183
Dikken, M. den, 43, 50–51, 53–55, 164–165,
171–172, 204, 252, 257
Disjoint reference, 5, 33–35
Distributive Phrase, 110–112

275

276

Index

Distributive Negative Phrase (DistNegP), 139
Distributivity, 109–110, 117–118, 127, 139,
146, 148
-e ‘whether’, 99, 239
Enç, M., 10, 15
Exhaustive identification, 78–81, 87–90, 95
test of, 78–79
Existential quantifiers, 11, 81–82, 106–107,
145–146,
negative, 89–90, 106, 114–115, 143
Existential verbs, 175
negative, 148–149
Experiencer, 37
Extraposition, 178, 236–238, 247
Farkas, D., 43, 83
Finno-Ugric languages, 1
Focus, 3
clausal, 231
contrastive, 79
head finality constraint on, 88
movement, 86–87, see also long operator
movement
of adverbial participle, 225
of infinitive, 201–203, 211
postverbal, 29
Focus Criterion, 89–91
Generics, 155
Giannakidou, A., 139
Haegeman, L., 139
hogy-clauses
see that-clauses
Horváth, J., 30, 240, 242, 244
Hunyadi, L., 113, 121–122
Idioms, 32
Indefiniteness effect, 15–17, 144–145, 155–156,
172–173
Indefinites
non-specific, 10
specific, 10
Indirect object, 36
Individual-level predicates, 18
Infinitives
agreeing, 210–221
non-agreeing, 199–210
is ‘also’, 81–82, 108, 140–141
is distributive particle, 108, 140–141, 147–148

Kayne, R., 7, 43
Kenesei, I., 183, 205, 230–231, 234, 244
Kiefer, F., 62, 65, 68
Komlósy, A., 224
KP (Case Phrase), 152, 184, 186, 188
Kratzer, A., 18
Laczkó, T., 160, 175–178, 221, 224, 228
-lak/lek, 53–55, 204, 258
Linear Correspondence Axiom, 7, 43
Lipták, A., 99–100, 102, 234, 236, 254, 256
Long focus movement, 250
Long quantifier movement, 251
Long topic movement, 252, 259–260
Long prefix/verb modifier movement, 58,
251–252
már ‘already’, 66
Marácz, L., 31, 34, 181, 187
May, R., 111
Medve, A., 23
meg, 17
még ‘yet’, 66
miért ‘why’, 98
minden ‘every’, 156
Modality 43, 47–48
Molnár, V., 22
Mood, 43, 47–48
Morphosyntactic merger, 45
Multiple questions, 31–32
Negation, 82
constituent, 131, 133–134
multiple, 130–131
Negative concord, 4, 136
Negative polarity, 147
nem . . . hanem ‘not . . . but’, 134–135
nem mindenki ‘not everybody’, 134
nincs (negative existential verb), 148–149
Nominal predicate, 71–74
Nominative case, 55
Noun complement clauses, 235
Noun Phrases
definite, 154–155
indefinite, 155
predicative, 155
Nouns
bare, 151–152, 185
deverbal, 175–179
mass, 155
plural, 152

Index
Nuclear stress rule, 11, 113
Numeral phrases, 142–145, 152–153
Object agreement, 43, 49–55, 155, 203–205,
256
Object clitic, 54–55
Objective conjugation, 49, 155, 171, 173,
242
Olsvay, Cs., 133
Parasitic gaps, 86, 112, 260–262
Partial wh-movement, 240–242
Participles, 153
adjectival, 227–229
adverbial, 221–223
predicative adverbial, 223–227
Passive, 226–227
Past conditional, 46
Perfectivity, 62–63
Permissive construction, 215–218
Personal pronouns, 53, 171
3rd person, 321
case-marked, 194–195
Piñon, Ch., 64–65
Possessive construction, 157–175
Possessor, 176
caseless, 160–161, 164–166
dative, 161–162, 164–166, 173–174
pronominal, 168–171
Postpositional Phrases, 181–191, 194
as verb modifiers, 191–193, 195–197
PPs, 181–191, 194
Predication, 8
PRO
of adverbial participle, 222, 224
of event nominal, 177
of inflected infinitive, 218
pro-drop, 231
Pronominal head of CP, 230–236
Psychological verbs, 37
Puskás, G., 136, 139
Quantifier Phrases, 153
Quantifiers
distributive, 105–113
existential, 11, 81, 147–148
in the scope of focus, 82, 115–118
the scope of, 113–115
universal, 81–82, 98, 100–102, 105–107, 115,
118–119, 135–137, 143, 145–146
negative universal, 136–146, 149

277

Rebrus, P., 46, 49
Reinhart, T., 34
Relative clauses, 243–244
adverbial, 248–250
free, 244–245
headless, 244–245
proadverb head of, 248–250
pronominal head of, 244–246
Relative pronouns, 243–244
Scope principle, 47, 89, 113–114, 118–119,
124–125
se-pronouns, 136–146, 149
sem ‘neither’, 140–142
Sentence adverbials, 12, 106
Sentence intertwining, 250–260
sincs (negative existential verb), 149
Specificity filter, 102–103, 145–146
[+/–specificity] requirement, 15–17, 144–145,
155–156, 172–173
Stage-level predicates, 18
Stative verbs, 70
Stowell, T., 111, 117, 236
Stress assignment, 11, 113, 121, 135
Stylistic postposing, 121, 137–139, 148
Subject
non-specific, 14,
of agreeing infinitives, 210, 214–221
of event nominals, 176–177
of-ván/vén participles, 221–222
specific, 16
suppression in adverbial participle phrases,
222–224
Subject–object symmetry, 5, 31
Subjective conjugation, 49, 156, 171
Superiority Condition, 31, 100, 103
Szabolcsi, A., 15, 24, 78, 80, 82, 108, 109, 111,
114–116, 122, 133, 151 fn.1, 160–164,
171–172, 174–178
Tense, 43–47
that-clauses, 52, 230–236
adjunct, 242–243
adverb complement, 235–236
noun complement, 235
verb complement, 230–234
wh-/interrogative, 239–242
Thematic argument hierarchy, 38
Theta role of possessor, 160
Theta roles, 28, 35–37,
and aspect, 192–193

278

Index

Topic
contrastive, 22–25, 122–124
formal features of, 9, 11
function of, 2, 9
hanging, 259–260
Topicalization, 13
phrase-internal, 223, 228
Tóth, I., 147, 201, 212–213, 215, 217–219, 224
úgy ‘so’, 233
Unaccusatives, 228
Universal quantifiers, 81–82, 98, 100–102,
105–107, 115, 118–119, 135–137, 143,
145–146
negative, 136–146, 149
Uralic languages, 1
vala- ‘some’, 147–148
való (adjectivalizer), 176, 178
Verb modifiers (VM), 3, 136, 151–152
PPs as, 191–197

Verb movement, 84–85, 131
Verbal complex formation, 205–210, 225–227
Verbal prefix climbing, 57, 58, 206–208,
211
Verbal prefixes, 56–61, 144 fn. 4, 192
Verbs of possession, 175
Vogel, I., 231
Vowel harmony, 185, 194
VP-deletion, 31
Weak Crossover, 40–42
wh-island Constraint, 254
wh-movement, 98–99
partial, 240–242
wh-phrases, 89–90, 92, 98
wh-questions, 92, 98–99
Williams, E., 37
yes–no questions, 99
Zanuttini, R., 139

